This Burmese python wants to know what
is inside the diary of a CEO.
>> Oh my god.
>> Beautiful. Now, what are you feeling
right now?
>> Wondering why I do this for a living.
>> Have you ever done a podcast with a
10-ft snake across the table before?
>> No, this is my first.
>> Awesome. Bring out the next friend.
Don't bring it over here.
>> Just don't move.
>> Paul, what have you spent the last 20
years of your life doing? living out of
a backpack in the Amazon rainforest
barefoot with a machete to help the
indigenous people [music] save the
Amazon whatever it takes which means
crocodile bites snake very rare diseases
hunted by the narot traffickers with a
picture of that guy that scar [music] is
because he was shot in the head by a 7ft
arrow while he was trying to make
peaceful contact with the unconted
tribes [music] and this is actually a
very important story I think I have a
video of this
>> yeah this is world first footage so
tribe isolated so deep in the jungle
that they've never heard of a spoon or
the wheel or Jesus was coming out to
make contact. So, we do a 2-day boat
journey in one night through the worst
thunderstorm I've ever seen. They were
scared. We were [music] scared because
these tribes kill people all the time.
And they had one question. How do we
tell the bad guys from the good guys?
You see, these people are being hunted
by traffickers and gold miners and
loggers and boxed in by deforestation.
But if our oceans of rainforests are
vanishing, life on Earth is not
possible. Now, it's not too late, but
we're the last generation that can save
it. Paul, young kids are growing up
attached to screens and loneliness is at
an all-time high. Is there anything that
you learned in those 15 years that a
westerner like me would find useful?
>> 100%. So, let's start with purpose.
>> Listen, my my team gave me a script that
they asked me to read, but I'm just
going to ask you um in the nicest way I
possibly can. Thank you first and
foremost for choosing to subscribe to
this channel. It is um it's been one of
the most incredible crazy years of my
life. I never could have imagined. had
so many dreams in my life, but this was
not one of them. And the very fact that
these conversations have resonated with
you and you've given me so much feedback
is something I will always be
appreciative of. And I almost carry away
a sort of burden of uh responsibility to
pay you back. And the favor I would like
to ask from you today is to subscribe to
the channel if you um would be so
obliged. It's completely free to do
that. Roughly about 47% of you that
listen to this channel frequently
currently don't subscribe to this
channel. So if you're one of those
people, please come and join us. Hit the
subscribe button. It's the single free
thing you can do to make this channel
better. And every subscriber sort of
pays into this show and allows us to do
things bigger and better and to push
ourselves even more. And I will not let
you down if you hit the subscribe
button. I promise you. And if I do,
please do unsubscribe, but I promise I
won't. Thank you. [music]
Paul, you live an extraordinary life. A
very atypical extraordinary life. What
have you spent the last 20 years of your
life doing? trying to find a way to
explore the wildest parts of the Amazon
and figure out a way to save them.
>> The Amazon, for a lot of people that
don't know anything about this part of
the world, they'll they'll think of it
as a bunch of trees where lots of wild
animals live. What is the sort of
central misunderstanding of the true
nature of the Amazon?
>> I think it's a it's a problem of scale.
People don't understand the importance
of the Amazon. This is one of the most
crucial things on our planet. It's one
of the most physically defining features
of our planet. If you look at Earth from
space, you see this giant green belt
over most of South America. That's the
Amazon rainforest. And that's where
1ifth of our fresh water is contained
and another fifth of our oxygen is
produced. This system is irreplaceably
valuable to all life on Earth.
>> And you live in the Amazon.
>> For the last 20 years, I've lived mostly
in the Amazon. I've slept more nights
outdoors than I have in in my adult life
because I befriended the indigenous
people of the upper Amazon rainforest.
And that's that's what the book is
about. It's I went down there at 18
years old because I needed adventure.
And then the quest for adventure led for
this call to meaning. And then that led
to the discovery that we were the only
ones who could do anything to stop the
bulldozers and the chainsaws from
destroying the thing that we loved.
A lot of people have clicked on this
conversation for whatever reason. What
are we going to talk about today that
you think might be interesting to them
in their lives and what is the wide
variety of things from the conversations
you have every single day that compels
people cuz I want to give them a bit of
a tlddr before we get into the detail.
>> I think that what people are going to
find and this is what I tried to write
about was that I didn't know where I was
going at first. I just knew what I
loved. And so over the last 20 years,
it's been following a dream in a
direction. [snorts] And that dream was
finding a way to relieve the the
incredible stress that I felt over the
the state of the environment. We live in
these times where people feel like the
world is ending. There's nothing we can
do. Our oceans are collapsing. The
rainforests are vanishing. Elephants are
being hunted to extinction. And I wanted
to know, are there solutions to these
problems? Is there a way to change the
narrative of conservation and come up
with an alternative reality where
everything's okay? And do you think your
message is more timely now than ever
with everything that's going on with
technology and AI and this sort of great
transition we're in?
>> I think that this message is timely now
because whether we like it or not, we're
alive at the most important moment in
history. And the reason that that's true
is because never before as a global
society have we been all faced with the
same problem. If our ecosystems
collapse, life on Earth is not possible.
And we are the last generation in
history that's going to have a chance to
restore those ecosystems. and those
sacred cycles before it's too late.
>> And as it relates to mental health,
young kids are growing up attached to
physical to screens and to technology
and all these things. You've lived
almost the opposite life. It appears for
the last 20 years. I'm wondering if
there's anything, you know, cuz you said
today on your way here that you like
didn't know how to get out of the Uber
and
>> Yeah. No, it was a it was a mess getting
here. I almost got run over by a guy who
recognized me and said and said, "Get
out of the road, Anaconda guy." And then
I'd never opened uh I guess I'd never
opened a door with a button before, but
I couldn't figure out how to get out of
out of the Uber. And then uh I had I had
a whole adventure in the bathroom that
should have been filmed. Um but no, I
mean I have lived uh we used to we call
it the barefoot machete days. You know,
a lot of my early learning in the Amazon
took place under the toutelage of
indigenous experts. And these are people
that like JJ, who I meet when I first go
down to the Amazon, he didn't have shoes
until he was 13 years old. So he lived a
life where if you want to fish, you have
to go to the river.
>> And if you want to eat, you have to go
out into the forest, not to the
supermarket. And so when you see kids
today that are only using their thumbs,
it's not too surprising when people are
disconnected and disoriented and sort of
don't know what's real and what's not
real anymore. Because you go to the
mountains and the rain and the sky and
the rocks, we'll teach you what's real
real quick and you all have to agree on
it or else you'll die. And the jungle is
the same thing. It's sort of when you
find yourself with these chemical
physical boundaries,
life makes a lot more sense.
>> Have you been able to make sense of the
life that someone like me lives
more because you've spent time in the
Amazon?
>> Like you look at us differently. I know
that sounds like a crazy thing to say,
>> but in the same way that people might
look at the way you choose to live your
life and say, "This is very, very
strange." Do you look at people that,
you know, like me that work seven days a
week behind a screen and think that's a
very strange life?
>> I just know that I couldn't do it. I I I
depend almost almost
I'm so reliant on nature. I have to be
around trees. I fall asleep to frogs. I
I mean, even even being in a city, I go
seek out a place where there's a lot of
trees. I am like a forest creature. If
you take me out of my environment, I
start to stress and die. And there's a
part of me that yes, that starts to die
if you keep me locked in concrete or if
you were to if you were to relegate me
to a a I was just in a hotel last week
on the book tour and I realized nothing
in the room with me was natural. The
carpet, the table, the windows, the
television, everything that was in this
room with me was composite materials.
And I couldn't even open the window to
get to the outside air. And I it did
occur to me. I said, I wonder if other
people feel this type of of of societal
claustrophobia where to me it's I have
to have my feet in a river at some
point. I have to I have to every night
before I fall asleep, I have to look up.
It's a ritual. I have to look up and and
look at the stars. How else can you
pray?
And so for me, being in a city has
become a very different reality to what
I'm used I mean, just taking a shower. I
mean, trust me, it's not as much fun
standing in a cold tile box and spraying
water on yourself as it is running
through the jungle, diving into the
river and swimming and the whole river
rushing around you. It's a whole
different experience. And so, when I
come back, I get a little bit, you know,
I miss my I miss the frogs and the birds
and and sort of my neighbors of of of
the jungle.
>> Do you think there's like a collective
delusion in terms of the way we live our
lives? Do do you think we're we've gone
a bit crazy? Kind of like the frog in
the frying pan. It's happened so
gradually, the sort of technological
>> creep of our lives that,
>> you know, and we're looking at young
kids that are more anxious and depressed
than ever before. Loneliness is at an
all-time high.
>> More people are taking anti-depressant
medications than ever before.
>> I think that yes is the simple answer to
your question. That that that sort of
we're a species perpet we're a fish
perpetually out of water. that as humans
because we've taken ourselves away from
forests and away from deserts and away
from mountains and the ocean. I mean, we
used to be fishermen and we used to be
farmers and and now the life that we
live is so incredibly different than
that. If you ask kids where does their
meat come from, there are kids that will
say the grocery store. You know, they
don't know that chickens exist before
it's in the package. And and so, you
know, for for there was that generation,
which I think that you and I are both a
part of, where it was like we were the
bicycle generation. We might be the last
one where it was like you went out in
the morning and you were on your bicycle
or you were running around with your
friends and you would come home for
dinner and I was incredibly lucky to
have, you know, on the weekends I would
go to the woods. I would take a steak
and I would take one match and I'd take
my golden retriever and we would go get
lost up the side of a mountain and uh
we' just go camping. My rule was no
shelter, one match, one stake dog. So
you couldn't mess up the match.
>> At what age?
>> Uh I would say 12 or 14. I mean, I was
doing this. I had a little, you know, a
little hunting knife on my side.
>> Not typical for a 12-year-old,
>> but I needed it.
>> Why?
>> I don't know. I needed adventure. I
think because being being stuck in a
desk and being told you can't get up and
you can't even go to the bathroom, and
you you look down, do what we say, just
being controlled was so counterintuitive
to my essence. And so, I grew up with
this need for adventure. And then
somewhere along the way, the fact that I
couldn't drink the streams that I was
exploring or the fact that even when I
was deep, deep, deep in the forest, I
knew that if I really hiked for another
4 hours, I'll come out the other side. I
wanted to experience wilderness. I
wanted to experience wilderness where it
never ended. I wanted to see the really
wild places on the planet. And for some
reason, that was inside me since I was
very young.
>> So, how did you go from there? from
being that 13 year old to setting off at
what 17 years old with your Amazon
research in Peru.
>> You did go to university. You
>> you were actually really really smart. I
I hear
>> I was smart enough that they had me both
suspended and in in detention and in
American Mensa. I was I was I was really
all over the place. And and the thing is
they make you feel stupid when you can't
do the assignments. So I'd say, 'Why are
you failing math and why can't you read
this book and you didn't do your
homework? But I was like, I know I'm
smart and in the forest I was good at
tracking and I could survive and I could
make it through a weekend and I could
build shelter and so I always just
gravitated towards that. And so I spoke
to my parents. I dropped out of high
school. You can take your GED and get
out two years early with a with a with a
with a one-day test. And I did that. The
rule was I did have to go to university.
So, I had to start taking semesters, but
in between semesters, I was free to go
to the Amazon rainforest. And so, I
booked the most remote position that I
could at a place where it took 2 days by
boat from the nearest city to get to
this tiny little research station. And
it was run by this Peruvian guy and his
partner. And his name was JJ.
And that's the guy that opened the
Amazon for me.
>> He opened the Amazon for you?
>> Well, JJ grew up in the Amazon as an
indigenous person. And so what he was
learning, he the the first chapter in
this book is called the rarest of
species because he's the only unicorn in
the Amazon rainforest.
He's an indigenous person. So he's been
learning from his grandfathers,
grandfathers, grandfathers, grandfathers
all the way back.
>> And indigenous means
>> indigenous means his family is from the
jungle. Their heritage, their lineage
going back, they are jungle people.
They're from the Seaha tribe. And so his
father, Don Santiago, there they knew
the medicinal plants. They knew how to
fish for piranha. Then he can cut a
piece of callus off of his foot and put
it on a hook using himself as bait to
catch a bait fish. He can mash up a
Barbasco route and put it in a stream
and then all the fish float to the
surface. He can track a deer. He could
track a jaguar. He could track a person.
So these people know everything about
the forest and they're the people that I
came in with. And because I knew about
snakes, he knew every He knew everything
about the forest, the medicines, the
habits of the animals, the systems. The
only thing I knew was I said, "I know
how to handle snakes." And he said, "I'm
scared of snakes." And I said, "I could
teach you snakes." I said, "You teach me
everything else." And he goes, "You like
snakes?" He goes, "Come with us." He
said, "We go on a family hunting trip
once a year where we go on this
expedition 10 days into the jungle where
no one's allowed to go. Only people with
indigenous status." He said, "You're our
guest. You come with us." And so there I
was going up the river into parts of the
world that have yet to be named into the
wildest places in the Amazon rainforest
and learning from these guys through
experience how to catch fish out of the
river, how to navigate through difficult
parts of the of the stream when the
storms are coming, how to survive them.
And then we found anacondas. And so it
was like this I had this very very in
unorthodox training and introduction
into the jungle. How big is the Amazon
rainforest? Trying to get my head around
the scale of it.
>> I'm bad with numbers. What I do know is
that it's larger than the lower 48
states.
>> Wow.
>> It's it's absolutely tremendous. It's
the largest contiguous rainforest on
Earth.
>> And are there parts of it that people
have never been to?
>> 100%. There are still parts of the
Amazon rainforest that are unexplored.
There's parts of the Amazon rainforest
that no one's ever been to. And if you
really want to blow your own mind, the
canopy of the Amazon rainforest is about
150 160 ft up above our heads, which is
far.
>> And half of the life in a rainforest
exists in the canopy. So you're talking
about the most mega biodiverse biome
that has ever existed. There's never
been more terrestrial wildlife anywhere
on Earth than in the Amazon rainforest.
And right now in the entire fossil
record, we we're at the apex, the climax
community of the Amazon rainforest. It's
that brilliant. Where the Andes,
rainforest, cloud forests meet the
lowland tropical Amazon. There it is.
That's the most life we know of in the
entire universe.
>> And in terms of human life,
>> Mhm.
>> I hear there's lots of human life there
that we've never contacted.
>> There are various tribes living through
the Western Amazon. And you have the
Seaha and the Machenga and you have the
Yin and and then further out beyond all
of these there were always rumors that
there were uncontacted tribes
and and for the first many years that I
was there it was always someone's uncle,
someone's brother, someone's cousin
would would come back with these crazy
stories that someone had seen the tribes
and that they were that they were tall
and naked and they still hunted with
bows and arrows and they would and then
every now and And somebody would come
back with a 7ft arrow, a spear tipped
with bamboo, huge bamboo tip this big,
razor sharp, like a machete. And that
was the only proof we had that they
existed
until the day we met them.
>> When did you meet them for the first
time?
So, in order to explain how we met them,
we should probably explain why what
where we got to in how the how the
18-year-old researcher became the
director of of of a major organization.
But,
>> please
>> Okay. Well, some somewhere along the way
as we as we
as we did these expeditions through the
Amazon and I became closer and closer
with the indigenous people, you know, JJ
as a teacher kept telling me and that's
and that's what the the first chapter of
the book is about is, you know, him just
teaching me the incredible
interconnectedness. There's this there's
this moment that I write about where
he's going, "Look at this beach and tell
me the news." And I said, "What?" And he
said, "Yeah." He said, "Every day the
ground is like last night's newspaper.
It tells you what happened." So, I look
at the beach and there's jaguar tracks
and there's like a mess of jaguar tracks
and some Jaguar scat and I made no sense
of it. And he was like, "This is where
she came yesterday to drink.
That's where she pooped. This is where
she came today to drink. You can see the
newer tracks." And then he's like, "And
what you didn't notice, you didn't see
the vultures above us." And I look up
and there's vultures above us. And he
goes, "Notice they're not looking at us.
They're looking at the jaguar." And so
they're looking that way. Jaguar had a
fresh deer kill. and had continually
been eating and then coming to the river
to drink. And so he can decipher all of
these incredible things. And so as he's
taking me through these worlds of
butterflies and interconnected species
where there's a mist river flowing over
the rainforest, this this avatar on
Earth
and then we then they burned it down.
>> Who burned it down?
>> The loggers.
And so the first time I saw ancient
forest,
a place that I love with trees
significantly bigger than this room,
vanished. There's this cacophony of
life, this orchestra, this symphonic
roar of life that you get in the mo,
especially in the morning in the Amazon.
And then at night, there's the night
chorus. And when you hear that silenced,
it's one of the most horrific things
that you can experience because places
that we loved, trees that had been
standing for a thousand years, species
that had never been described by science
were all incinerated.
And I said to JJ, I said, "How do we
this this this can't be allowed? This
can't this can't possibly be something
that's permitted." And I said, "Isn't
there somebody that we can call?" We
were standing on the side of the river,
and he he leaned forward. And he looked
this way and he looked that way and he
goes, "Do you see anybody?" He goes,
"Cuz I don't see anybody." He goes, "You
have to do something." I said, "I have
to do something." I said, "I'm 19, 20
years old." I said, "What am I going to
do?" I said, "I don't have a PhD. I
don't have a trust fund. I don't have a
media presence. I don't have anything."
I had a machete and I had bare feet. We
both had machetes and bare feet. And so
that was the start of the journey where
we said, "The thing we love is being
destroyed." We could see the smoke on
the horizon. The trees that we had
explored and become to love were laying
smoldering on the ground in front of us.
And we said, "Okay, now we have to
figure out a way to change the
narrative. The wildest place on earth is
about to be destroyed, bulldozed, and
burned. How do we save it?" And so
that's where when you ask the question
of how does life in the jungle sort of
translate to what your listeners are
going to find interesting, it's taking
on a task that's so gigantic that at the
start of it, we couldn't even come up
with a we couldn't even conceptualize
how it could be possible even with the
right tools
>> to save the Amazon
>> to save the Amazon rainforest, let alone
for two guys with zero qualifications,
bare feet and machetes. And so we
started behind zero and today we're at
the point where we've turned loggers and
gold miners into conservation rangers.
We're protecting 130,000 acres of the
river. We're on the cusp of creating a
national park. Me and JJ are the
directors of Jungle Keepers and we're
about to make history because we're
going to save the entire watershed and
all the trees and animals and heartbeats
that are left. And that's the story that
I'm trying to tell. That's the whole
reason for my existence. That's why I
that's what I wake up and do every day.
>> And you've really taken on that
responsibility in a very personal way. I
can tell.
>> Yeah. Yeah. There's a there's a point
where, you know, I remember cuz you grow
up I mean I I was born in Brooklyn and
then we you know I grew up in Jersey for
a while and then we moved to the Hudson
Valley. But when you start you start
going to the Amazon for months and
months and months out of the year and
you come back with scars and stories
where a jaguar is breathing on your neck
and you you go out on a solo and you
come back and then suddenly standing and
making conversation at a barbecue feels
different.
It's it's almost like I imagine I have a
lot of veteran friends and sort of you
you almost get addicted to the action
and then you also get addicted to the
the the the team, you know. Uh Sebastian
Younger writes about this about the the
addict the the the the need for
community the tribe and sort of the the
mission and I think that that's one
thing that people are missing today
where they they they don't know you know
we've been disassociated from religion
and community and and and immediate sort
of connection with other humans. And so
then well then what else is there? How
do how do you where where to what do you
more your existence? What do you what's
your what's your purpose? What do you
wake up and do every day? And so I
think, you know, in the old days it was
like, you know, we have to we have to
defend ourselves from the outside world,
from waring communities, you know, or
even just providing for your family. We
have to bring water every day. We have
to chop wood every day. We have to
figure out how to survive. And like
today, I mean, when I'm here, I wake up
and I go, "Well, there's there's water
in the fridge, so I don't have to do
that." And I'm like, "The air
conditioner is on and the I'm like, I
guess I'll check my phone, [laughter]
you know." And so I, you know, I think
we have, like you said, become somehow
we've gone really far away from what we
are built for.
And one of the beautiful things that
happens when you go into the wild, and
this can be any wild, is that it starts
to change you. And so you go into the
wild and you start picking up logs and
throwing them. You start splitting
firewood, and the first day you're going
to have calluses on your hands, but then
after a few weeks, you're going to have
tough hands. You start walking barefoot,
same thing. The sun starts to make your
skin thicker and tanner and more
resilient and then the rain will hammer
that home and you start to get your eyes
start to get sharper and you start to
pay more attention to what you're
hearing. And so you start going through
this whole transformation where you
start to be almost become a different
animal. You become the jungle version of
yourself. You become the mountain
version of yourself. Your legs start to
get strong again. And so so the wild
puts you through this gauntlet of
transformation and you become connected
to your environment. And then that
feeling of disassociation tends to
alleviate a little bit.
>> I heard about this particular part of
the brain that changes as well. You
talked about transformation.
>> Yeah.
>> Um they discovered something not so many
years ago called the anterior midsulate
cortex.
>> Mhm.
>> Andrew Hubman and I heard him say that
he thinks it was one of the most
important discoveries in neuroscience of
the last
>> century. The anterior mid-s singular
cortex is a part of the brain sitting
between your emotional brain and your
executive control center that
essentially grows when you do hard
things.
>> Not when you do things that um
specifically when you do things that you
don't want to do but you do them anyway.
So not running a marathon because you
enjoy it. Things you don't want to do
and you do it anyway. And it went
through some of the studies I saw said
that younger people that have been
brought into this sort of doom scrolling
generation have smaller ones. If you are
um obese, it's smaller. Um athletes have
bigger ones and people who live longer
have even bigger ones. And it's they
kind of call it like the muscle of the
brain of doing hard things. And so when
you were talking about that physical
transformation, I weirdly thought about
I think it was Roosevelt who
>> after losing his mom and his wife on the
same day.
>> Yes.
>> After his baby girl was born, he went
out to the bad lands and spent two years
doing pretty much what you said,
>> putting himself in intentional
discomfort.
>> Yeah. and he came back and all of his
friends described him as being
transformed. He went on to become the
youngest president in American history.
He got shot and carried on doing the
speech. He led the charge um uh I think
it was the Spanish crusades or something
like the Spanish war.
>> And the Rough Riders.
>> Yeah, the Rough Riders. And they all
pointed at the moment when he went out
to the Badlands. They said it shaped him
into becoming a completely different
man. That that discomfort.
>> Yeah, 100%. And and that's that's why
Native American cultures for the
initiation of their young men would have
vision quests where they would send them
out into the wilderness. And there's
still different there's all different
types. Aboriginal cultures have similar
things. And I wanted to put myself
through that. And so I went out on
that's what I described in my first book
is going out on that's where JJ taught
me enough to survive in the jungle. And
then I started going out on 10day solos
into place. I'd have people bring me to
the last place that had a name. Like I'm
talking about poachers. And then I would
start hiking and I would go so deep in
the Amazon rainforest that I was just
off the map and I would try and survive
out there. And so I had a lot of
adventures that I should not have
survived. But it was very important to
me to put myself through that because I
grew up with that discomfort. I grew up
with the overwhelming crushing stress of
being told that we're at the end of
days. We are losing I mean I saw it at
the Bronx Zoo. They said, you know,
we're losing our rainforests. And they
had the sound of the chainsaws and you
see the trees going over and they said
we're losing elephants. You'd see
somebody shoot and the elephant goes
over and they just said everything that
you for me everything you love is being
destroyed and pretty soon we're not
going to be able to drink and
everything's going to be polluted and
our fisheries are being destroyed. And I
said wait so wait a second. I said I
have to know if it's really that bad. So
when I got old enough don't it's not
just that I was inspired to go out on a
mission. And it was that I wanted to
find out for myself cuz I'm I don't like
finding out through a screen. I don't I
don't want other people filtering my
information. I wanted to find out for
myself. Is it really that bad? And so I
was going out on a quest to understand
what the reality was.
>> If I sat 18-year-old you at this table,
he sat there
>> and you know this version of you at what
>> 38
>> 38 you were sat there. So 20 years
difference.
>> What would the notable differences be
between these two men?
Um, well, he didn't know how to fish
with his feet. [snorts] Um, that's for
sure. His machete skills would be
terrible. But the the noticeable
difference would be that that
18-year-old, his greatest dream was to
alleviate the environmental stress that
he grew up with, escape the world of
rules, find purpose in life,
and to just have adventures. My my
greatest dream was to see the Amazon
rainforest. I looked at people like
Teddy Roosevelt and Jane Goodall and I
said, "Man, they had such incredibly
like extraordinary lives." And I said,
"How come my life can't be like that?
I'm over here in detention." You know,
I'm over here being told I didn't do my
homework. And I'm like, "I want to chop
wood and carry water. I want to go to
war. I want to be scared. I want to be
challenged." And so for me it was I I
was that would be the difference is that
I would be hungry for all of that.
Whereas the person sitting across from
you today, my body is a Jackson Pollock
painting of scars,
crocodile bites, tiger bites,
infections, times that I've been almost
crushed to death by elephants. I've been
hunted by the narot terrorists. And at
this point, the responsibility at that
kid got to see all the things he wanted
to see. We found the biggest anacondas.
I lived through the amazing adventures
and that's great.
The person sitting across from you today
is responsible for protecting millions
of animal lives. And my job is to
explain to people that we that everyone
reading this message or listening to
this message has the chance to help the
indigenous people save the Amazon before
we lose it forever. And so that's the
main difference is that at that age I
was just I just wanted some
swashbuckling adventure. And now I found
that adventure became meaning. I found
it along the way. And then now I'm on a
whole other journey. Now it's now it's
can we bring it home? Now it's can we
achieve something that we thought was
impossible and change the narrative of
how it's done.
>> And I guess this kind of brings us back
to this question about the unconted
tribes. You said you and JJ were talking
about how you might go about saving the
Amazon.
Was highlighting the unconted tribes in
the Amazon part of the mission there?
>> No. Very much no. That's a great
question because what we started doing
was we looked at this river basin and we
said, "Okay, we we we love this this one
really wild river and now we said why
why has this river been so wild?" You
know, so you think of the Amazon as a
tree of rivers. You have the main Amazon
channel and then all these millions of
branches. And so the upper Amazon, the
uppermost branches of the Amazon
rainforest, those tip tip tops, people
are only just getting to them now. You
know, the main Amazon channel is a
shipping port and then you have these
huge tributaries going off of it. And
you can get in as far as Aquitos with a
steam ship. Like you can go all the way
through Brazil thousands of miles and
get all the way to Aikitos, Peru
>> to the almost the back end of the
Amazon.
>> I've been there.
>> And and it's beautiful.
>> We are at the southern edge in the
tributaries down there. There's one
tributary.
>> What's a tributary?
>> A tributary is is an offshoot from a
larger river.
>> So a stream is a tributary of a larger
stream which goes into, you know, then
eventually you reach the Hudson River.
>> And so this is a tiny little tributary.
And the we what we discovered is that
the reason people hadn't developed this
tributary, the reason other indigenous
communities hadn't formed was that for
hundreds and hundreds of years, this
particular river had been protected by
the violent, mysterious, Mashkopiro,
nomadic, uncontacted tribes. And that
had kept it wild. They were the original
jungle keepers, but by the time I got
there, there was sort of just a myth.
And so they were something that they
said they lived really far up river past
the last indigenous community. And I
when I say indigenous community I mean
people that we can talk to, people that
we can interface with that I can speak a
little Spanish to and they'll understand
me.
>> I think that's an important distinction.
>> Yes.
>> Because can you make that distinction
between indigenous and these tribes?
>> Yes. So within Peru, you have Lima and
and you know Michelin star restaurants
and all this amazing food and then you
travel down to Cusco where you have
Machu Picchu and you have the Andes and
all of that incredible culture and then
you go down to the jungle and it's a
little bit like going to the back end of
Alaska. That's where it's like you are
very far away from LA or New York like
but it's the same country and out there
you'll reach these communities where
they are indigenous and so in the
reserve that we currently protect as
jungle keepers there's two indigenous
communities there and we work with them
to sort of support them because as these
loggers and narot traffickers and gold
miners come in they see them as as a
mark they'll go in and say oh there's
these helpless indigenous people how can
we exploit them
>> how can we get their trees, their fish,
they'll go and take those things from
them or they'll or they'll sell them
something that's not worth what what
they think it is. And so we've been
working with these indigenous
communities to say, "Do you want the
loggers to come in and cut down all of
your trees?" And they go, "No." And they
go, "But at the same time, we need a
little bit of gasoline because what if
we're having a baby and we have to get
our daughter to a hospital in town?" And
so we've been working with them to
provide sustainable jobs as rangers
protecting their own land. And it's such
a simple solution whereas otherwise they
would go and be loggers to get that
cash. And so we were working with these
communities and now they're rangers and
boat drivers and guides and handymen.
And they called us about a year ago and
they said something incredible is
happening and it's going to be
dangerous, but you are the directors and
you're part of this family and you're
part of this story and we need you here
for this, but the tribes are about to
come out of the forest.
And we were in town and where what you
know what we do now is you know we and
we can explain this later but we raise
money and we bring it to the Amazon
where we the local people have the
opportunity to set aside huge acreage of
of the Amazon to protect it. We're we're
changing the narrative of destruction
where we just protect it before they get
to it. And so we were in town with JJ
who's now the director of this major
organization and we're talking to our
lawyers and we're in the office and we
get this call that the tribe is out.
>> The tribe is out.
>> What does that mean? It means the
mythical unconted tribe that when I
arrived in Peru, the president of Peru
had been saying these are a myth. They
don't exist and it's just it's the
boogeyman. It's been made up as a story
to scare the loggers. So, their
existence was contested. They were
almost on the fringes of imagination.
>> Could we not have flown a plane over
there or something? Is that you know,
this sounds like a dumb question, but
presumably we have satellites and we can
zoom in.
The BBC did do a piece where they were
flying a plane and they were looking at
an unconted
tribe from miles away and they said,
"We're being very careful not to disturb
them, but there is a tribe in the
rainforest that has no contact with the
outside world." And you could see these
people bending and they're looking at
the plane, but the plane's not close
enough to really scare them or to cause
them any distress. And so, we have done
that. But then on our river out in the
middle of nowhere where no one's heard
of the BBC,
you just hear stories from loggers
who've come down river from three weeks
up river. You can go for three weeks up
the river and hit nothing. There's
nothing human. It's like the last
endless forest. And so when the
community called and they said there's
arrows on the beach, the tribe is coming
out. It's the first time in 10 years
that the tribe seems to be coming out of
the jungle to make contact. And so they
got they got the directors of Jungle
Keepers up there. We had to we had to
rush to be there. They begged us to be
there so that we could see it because
they were worried that we wouldn't
believe them.
And so we got there and we went all
night. And when you go up a river at
night, we do a two-day boat journey in
one night.
And so the guy right there, the picture
with the guy who has the scar on his
forehead, that's Ignosio. He that scar
is because he was shot in the head by a
7-ft arrow while he was trying to make
peaceful contact with the unconted
tribes. He was trying to give them a
gift and they got spooked and they
scared and they shot him in the head and
he almost died from that. When we heard
that this was happening and he's now one
of our best jungle keepers rangers. We
said, "Can you do a two-day boat journey
in one night?" And he went, "Yes, sir."
and he put on a headlamp and he got in
the back of the boat and we took an open
top canoe and we drove from 6:00 p.m.
until 9:00 a.m. the next day through the
worst thunderstorm I've ever seen. I was
on the front of the boat with a
flashlight using the crocodile eyes, the
Cayman eyes on the side of the river to
navigate cuz they shine. The eyes shine
comes back. The the the storm was so bad
that I we couldn't see anything. We
couldn't see the side of the river and
because of the light igniting the
raindrops, you can't you can't even see
what's in front of you. So we were using
the the croc eyes to to navigate where
the edges of the river was. So I was
spotting and telling him which way to go
and he drove and we did that all night
long. Got to the indigenous community
and said, "Okay, so what's going on?"
And they said, "Oh yeah, they left.
Tribe's gone."
The only thing that they had was that
one guy the previous day had been shot
by an arrow
and he had been fishing and he had seen
the tribes. So he said, "And they had
shot an arrow at him." The first thing
they had done was shot one of these 7-ft
arrows at him and the way it had hit the
boat ricocheted and then hit his thick
leather belt and blunted the tip of the
arrow and he had the arrow. [snorts]
And so he says, "So there are there are
people here." And then a native
anthropologist from another region
showed up and he said, "I they know me
as the grandfather. I can speak to these
people. I speak a little bit of their
language." And so we stayed another
night, two days deep in the jungle. And
the following morning we said, "Okay,
we're getting out of here. There's
obviously nothing here but, you know,
stories and footprints and arrows and we
have important work to do back in town."
>> And did you believe them?
>> I've learned one thing working in the
Amazon. Always believe the locals.
Always. There's there's if they say it's
there, they're not wrong. And that's
part of the reason that I've gotten to
go on these adventures. You know, when
JJ Tell told me there's places you can
go that are so wild that it's like the
Galopagos. the animals don't know a
human, but you have to go for days on
foot to the topmost reaches of the
rivers to find this. Well, that's why I
went on these these solos. And so I
write that's what that's as a writer
that's what I do is try and take people
on these adventures through the Amazon.
And so when they said the tribe is
coming, Ignasio, the guy who'd been shot
in the head, he said, "Listen to me." He
said, "You're" He said, "You're my boss,
right?" I said, "Yeah." He goes, "I need
to speak to you like a friend." I said,
"Speak, speak, speak." And he said,
"They're coming. You'd be an idiot to
leave." And so we posted up, we waited.
How he knew?
>> Yeah. I'm wondering [laughter] how he
knew.
>> He just knew, man. They just know. It's
like they can they can tell. And then,
you know, I mean, these are guys who
know when there's a jaguar close by the
sound of the birds. They know when a
storm's coming before the storm is
audible. You know, they they have higher
tuned senses than we do. And and so he
said, "Look, the tribe is coming.
There's the arrow. They're in the
region." And he goes, "And when they
come this close, they generally they
want to talk." And I said, "But this is"
and sure enough, you hear mushko and
everyone starts screaming. And it was
just this moment of absolute panic where
women were lifting babies and chickens
are flying around and dogs and we're in
this tiny little indigenous community on
the side of a river with hundreds and
hundreds of miles of jungle around. And
we run to the edge of this, you know,
the edge of the river where this cliff
is. And across the river, we see them
coming towards us. and they're walking
out of the jungle and they're naked from
head to toe. They just have some string
tied around their waists, penises tied
up to their bellies. They all have seven
foot long bows and arrows and they're
crouched over and they're looking at us
and we're standing there and you go
you sort of like you go I I just I I
wanted I wanted to see this and now I'm
not so sure I want to be here cuz there
are warriors coming out of the jungle
and they're from a thousand years ago.
So I asked the anthropologist, I said,
"They're like stone age people." And he
goes, "They don't have stones." He said,
"They're still in the bamboo age." He
said, "These people are living such a
primitive lifestyle. They're hunter
gatherers
and they've been isolated so deep in the
jungle for so many centuries that it's
like a time capsule. So there was a
thousand years between us. We're
standing on either side of the river
with a thousand years between us." And
this aperture into the history of what
humankind used to look like. And these
people came out holding their bows and
arrows that they had made out of the
jungle and they held up their hands and
they were talking to us across a river.
And it was sort of shirts versus skins.
We were just two tribes separated by a
little bit of water and they wanted to
communicate.
>> With what language?
>> With their language. They I mean it's we
don't even know really what to call
them. For a while they were calling them
the Mashkapiro, which means the wild
piro people. And then um more more
recently and partly because of our
encounter they held up their hands and
the first thing they said was no mole.
We are the brothers. Brothers and so
then our side said the same thing. The
anthropologist said no mole brothers.
And then this this this exchange began
and it's like you know I as a Spanish
speaker when I've been in Italy I can
use my Spanish to kind of get through in
in Italian. And I feel like it's like
that the Yin people can speak to the
Mashkapiro and it is an approximate
translation.
And the first thing that they said after
coming out of the jungle a thousand
years late to civilization was
send us bananas. They said send us food.
And they demanded that we send them
plantains as an offering. And our side
said you put down your weapons. We will
talk to you but we do not want this to
end violently. We want this to be
peaceful. If you want to talk to us, put
down your bow and arrows because a
shotgun, a shotgun only goes how many
meters? You know, it's not even going to
go 100 meters, 50 m, maybe buckshot.
A longbowow arrow is going to go 300 m.
It's going to go far
>> and they're needless to say, they're
very good with those arrows.
>> They are very good with those arrows.
These things will fly. Um, and so even
standing on the other side of the river,
we were not safe. And so we were all
standing behind trees. We were watching.
Ignasio, who'd been shot before, was
watching with the binoculars. And he's
going, "Whenever you see them walking,"
he said, "they let you see them, and
then they clever girl you in the forest
where there's one watching you from the
shadows." And he he would grab me by the
shoulder and go, "Look, there's one."
And you would just see this, you know,
red face paint in the shadows of the
forest. And he'd have the bow trained on
us. And so while some of them in the
front were putting the bows down, there
was others of them in the shadows that
were making sure that they still had
support. But we asked the guys in the
front to put down their arrows. The
anthropologists got in the river and
gave them an offering of bananas.
>> I think I have a video here of this.
>> Yeah, this is world first footage.
>> I'll let you um You know how to use an
iPad, right? [laughter]
Um, there we go. Yeah. So, this is this
was this is just a random moment from
the earlier days, but this is that
moment where everyone starts screaming,
"Mosh, go and we're all running." And
this is what I was talking about where
they are moving across the beach. And
you can see the sort of the posture
they're using there. I mean, he's got
they have their bows and arrows in hand
and then they showed up and see they're
pointing. They were worried that our
cameras were guns and so they were
asking to put down the cameras. They
were curious about various members of
our tribe and they were all talking at
the same time and so it was very
difficult to understand what they
wanted.
>> What's he doing with his finger there?
He's doing
>> this.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't know. This is the moment that we
gave them the bananas. And what's
[snorts] haunting about this is the
desperation that you see on them where
they're all rushing to get the bananas
and they're not necessarily taking them
like they're going to share later.
They're taking them like I get my
bananas, you get your bananas. You see
this? They're all rushing
to get this little boatload. And these
are people that don't have boats. And as
they're doing this, they're all talking
at the same time. It was like a flock of
parrots. It was just a cacophony of of
sound.
And they're all fighting over these
plantains. And and then once they get
them, each person held their own. They
have rope and plantains. And this
interaction went on for several hours.
And we negotiated with them. And this is
just the footage. This is the footage
that we're allowed to release right now.
And this is them moving back off into
the jungle. There's a lot more that
happened. And again, that's where that's
why that's why we're releasing this now.
I should say that that's why we waited a
while to release this footage because
footage like this is incredibly
sensitive for a number of reasons.
A, you don't want people to think that
we went out and contacted these people
that want to be left alone. You also
don't want to encourage other people to
indulge their misconceptions. People go,
"Oh, these are the last free people on
earth. They live perfectly in balance
with nature." No, people will go looking
for them. Whereas, for hundreds of
years, these people have asked for one
thing and one thing only, to be left
alone. And they've enforced that kind of
like the Comanches with arrows. And on
this day, they said, "Please give us
food. Please give us rope." And they had
one other question.
They said, "How do we tell the bad guys
from the good guys?" And we said, "What
do you mean? Who are the bad guys?" And
they said, "Some of you shooted us with
the jiu-jitsu, with the fire sticks,
the guns." And we were going, "Who who
does that?" We said, "We are not the bad
guys." And they said, "No, you also,"
they said, "We know you cut down our
trees." They were speaking to all of us.
It was not there's no like, you know,
white guy, brown guy, Peruvian,
foreigners, none of that. It was just
all of you outsiders,
stop cutting down our trees. Our trees
are our gods. It was sort of like, you
don't do that.
And then when they left just a few weeks
ago, we learned that the narcot
traffickers view them as a threat. And
there was actually a mass grave found of
a similar clan. And so these people are
being boxed in by deforestation and
hunted by narot traffickers and gold
miners and loggers. And so I think that
them coming out of the forest was their
way of saying, "Hey, we're trying to get
a read on what's going on in the outside
world. Who is it? Who are the good guys?
Who are the bad guys? They don't know
that Jungle Keepers is protecting the
land that they live on.
>> They've never [clears throat] heard of a
spoon or the wheel or Jesus or World War
II or the country of Peru. And so so
they're coming out with so many
questions. And the only way to care for
these people and to give them the the
the rights that they deserve is to
protect the forest they live in.
>> Do you know why some of them seem to be
touching their nose?
>> It's funny. I didn't notice that. I
think this is this is this is going to
be your discovery to anthropology. I did
not notice that, but it does. You see
this a lot of them are doing this.
>> Yeah.
>> And the the outfit um
>> the outfit
>> What is this outfit? This it looks like
there's kind of rope tied around their
midrift with their penises out.
>> Mhm. Yeah. The the the head of the penis
is covered by rope.
>> Oh, they've got the penis up into the
rope.
>> No, the head of the penis is up and
protected. And and that makes sense
given the jungle where there's
mosquitoes and bot flies and sand flies.
That that's a smart move. And then rope
seems to be I mean what is it goes like
fire rope ladders like I think it's like
man's second invention.
>> They are obsessed with rope. That's how
they make their bow strings. That's how
they make their arrows. That's how they
lash things together to make the the the
limited structures that they make. And
some of what we know about them is, you
know, we find their camps after they
leave. So we know what they eat. They
eat primarily turtles and monkeys. They
don't fish. They don't have fish hooks.
>> They They don't eat humans, do they?
>> They do not eat humans. They are not
cannibal tribes.
>> That's a rumor people have talked about
before. People have said,
>> "Yeah, there's even a couple versions of
my voice in AI saying that on the
internet, but it is not true."
>> And their haircuts, they all seem to be
have the sort of mullet style haircut
from
>> It seems like they all grab the front
and just find a way to cut it. There
might be like one guy with a machete who
just does the haircuts.
>> And for a lot of them, this is the first
time they've seen a human.
>> So, actually, this was first contact.
The anthropologist who came to the
scene, who managed this interaction,
he said he had met an unconted tribe
before in the region. He said none of
these were men that he'd met. And the
other thing, notice they're all men.
>> Yeah.
>> The women were hidden hidden in the
forest. And while the men were making a
distraction in front of us, the women
were raiding the farm behind us.
>> Raiding
>> raiding the farm.
>> Your farm.
>> The indigenous people's farm. Our
community's farm.
>> So the women went to steal while they
were distracting you.
>> That's right.
>> And did you catch the women on tape?
>> No. No. No. No. No. No. Everyone was We
were all huddled up very, very close. I
mean, this was an incredible encounter.
But let me explain. The prevailing
emotion during this entire thing was
fear on both sides. They were scared. We
were scared. The indigenous people
naturally have shotguns anyway. Everyone
had their shotguns out. They all had
some of them had put their bows on the
beach, but they had other they had
archers waiting. And so everyone was
sort of, you know, it was like, "Put
down your guns and we can talk." But
nobody really wanted to put down their
guns.
>> And how do you know the women were
stealing from your farm?
>> [snorts]
>> Because after this was all over and we
went to the farm, everything had been
pulled up. All the yuka, all the
plantains, all the sugarcane, the entire
farm was ruined.
>> How'd you know it was the women?
>> The women in the village told me it was
the women. They was the women. Also, you
see the smaller footprints. These men
have wide big men. They're from walking
barefoot their whole lives. Their feet
get ancho. They get really thick. And
so, and I have jungle feet like that
now, but these guys have almost duck
feet at this point. Like big, fat,
calloused feet that get wider. You ever
see a farmer's hands?
>> Yeah.
>> But they just they just grow.
>> Like that.
>> They're all young as well.
>> Where's Where are the older people?
>> We'd love to know.
We don't know. There's some tribes in
the Amazon where the elderly people have
more permanent settlements. There's been
rumors of some extreme tribes where the
elderly people if they can't keep up are
just left to perish. Uh but we saw
people between the ages of probably 12
and 45. I don't think anybody looks like
they're in their 50s.
So we left with more questions than
answers. They on that day they did get a
pot that they they stole from a from you
know the community you know they have
their their farm and so there there was
also a machete at the farm. Somebody
just whacked it into a log. And so as
they were leaving, one of the best
things that we caught on video that we
have we're not able to share yet is that
one of these guys, and this was at the
end after while everybody was going
home, the anthropologist held up his
hands and he said, you know, no mole
brothers, go in peace. And these guys
actually asked about me. I was the only
person there with a big beard. And they
said,
they said that one. They said, show us
that one. And so I came forward. I stood
at the edge of the river, which my heart
was pounding. And the anthropologist
said, he said, hold up your hands. Show
them that you don't mean any harm. I
held hel held up my hands like this and
they held up their hands and they sang.
They said no more. They knew that I
wasn't from the indigenous community.
And that was an incredible moment of we
couldn't communicate but it was just
sort of that basic I acknowledge you and
they said I acknowledge you and we just
had this thing across the river in about
a thousand years and just and then that
was it. And as they left, you know, one
of the guys had a machete and he was he
showed it to us over his shoulder like
this. And one of my friends was going,
"Oh," you know, in the local language he
was saying, "Put down the machete. Leave
the machete." And the guy just smiled
and looked at us like, "Yeah, come and
get it. Come and get it." And then at
just as they left, one of the warriors
walked out to the beach, put an arrow on
the string, smiled at us, and just shot
it. Was like, "Ha!"
>> Up into the air,
>> just at us in general, just to spook us.
And then they all turned left and left,
you know. So they have a sense of humor.
We saw them smile, you know. We
exchanged a little bit of that with them
as well.
>> They look cold.
They are cold. I mean, it's it's it's
95° on that day. The other thing is it
was cool as they're coming. If you go to
the part where they're coming across the
beach, there was millions of
butterflies. That beach was covered in
just millions of butterflies. And so as
these people are walking out, the
butterflies are just swarming around
them. Go back to the beginning. The that
right there. If you just notice, we
don't notice it at first, but as they're
moving, look at that. The world is
swirling with lapid lepodopter in
colors. Just just absolute
>> insanity how how beautiful this scene
was. And I mean, when you see this, you
know, if a if a Tyrannosaurus Rex walked
out behind them, I wouldn't have been
surprised. It was such a strange
literally unbelievable thing to see
because
you know these these literally are the
last people on Earth that are still
living in this way where society we have
planes, trains, automobiles, iPhones,
all of this technology. We're talking
about going to other planets.
They don't have metal,
even a knife, unless they get it from
someone else. And so it's just it's just
an incredible, you know, the other thing
is they do have medicinal technologies.
They're able to stay infection-free
living in the tropical wet jungle.
That's pretty incredible
>> cuz they're they're virtually naked.
>> I mean, essentially naked. I think
that's that's how they carry their rope.
I don't think that's so much of clothing
as we need rope and that's how we carry
it. It's very it's very very complicated
because the loggers
shoot at them, the narcos shoot at them.
People shouldn't be getting into the
places that they live. And if you think
about in the last few centuries, how
many indigenous cultures have been
annihilated by the outside world coming
in these there's no shortage of these
stories. And in this particular case, in
2026, when we have the communication and
people are able to hear this story, this
is why we're releasing this footage
because the only hope these people have
is if we protect them. They can't come
on a podcast. They can't address the
United Nations. They can't write a pet
petition. The only hope they have is if
we are able to protect the forest that
they live in. That's it. And that's why
we released this footage now. Cuz for a
long time we said we can't release it.
We said, "What if what if crazy hippie
people go down there thinking that these
are the last free people and they want
to go live with them? That will kill
them. The outside pathogens that you and
I carry on us every day, the common cold
that we have immunity to, could wipe out
an entire tribe." And how many tribes
like this do we believe are in the
Amazon rainforest?
>> Several thousand little tribes, little
clans that moved nomatically through the
Amazon.
>> Were they tall?
>> They looked like they were at least, you
know, 5'9, 510. They were pretty tall,
especially because the the Peruvians and
the indigenous communities that we work
with tend to be on the smaller side.
>> They they they are taller than the
average uh some of the other tribes.
There's another tribe that we ran into
down there called the Nawa. And those
people were were absolutely tiny. They
were s like below five feet. All of
them. Um
these guys were tall. Yeah.
And is there a leader here? Is someone
in charge?
>> Another great question. It seems to be
that there's two they look like
brothers. There seems to be two guys who
do most of the talking. One in
particular who seems to be doing the
most gesticulating and he was
communicating more forcefully. He he had
a smile. That guy, he had a smile on his
face at certain times.
>> This one?
>> Yeah, I think so. And And he was the one
that would walk the furthest out into
the river.
Yeah. And he seems well muscled,
healthy.
>> He's the biggest as well in size by the
looks of it.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
These tribes have been known to kill
people.
>> These tribes kill people all the time.
The the day after this happened, we went
down river and one of the people who had
been maintaining the peace during this
negotiation across the river was my
friend George. And George kept saying,
"Don't worry, it's going to be okay.
Don't worry, no mole." And he would say,
"Let's get them more bananas." And he
said, "You stay behind the tree. Say,
hey, please put down your camera. They
don't understand that it's not a gun."
He was making sure that everyone was
calm. Well, George was driving the day
after this in the river as he does every
day and he rounded one riverbend and the
tribe was out again. They were further
up river and usually when they leave
they go deep into the jungle but on this
day they had been walking up the river
which nobody expected and so when his
boat came around the river they hadn't
expected it and they open fired.
Everybody else on the boat was able to
get down under the the benches which is
made out of heavy thick wood. As he was
driving, he caught an arrow over the
scapula,
came out by his belly button.
So, it collapsed his right lung and cut
through his whole body
and he had to be helicopter evacuated
out of the indigenous community. And
somehow he lived.
But he's never going to be the same. And
there's there's a hundred stories I
could tell you of people that have been
killed by them.
But now and more and more there's
stories of that they are also being
exterminated. So their violence is in
response to the fact that the outside
world has been cruel to them. And the
only way that they can ensure that they
survive is by keeping the outside world
out.
>> This is a might be a bit of a dumb
question, but there's no consequence to
that is there from the Peruvian
government or anything. the proving
government aren't trying to um you know
if they if this uncontacted tribe kills
somebody they're not necessarily going
to go there and try and [laughter]
enforce any kind of like law. That's
actually a great question because it
illustrates something that I think a lot
of people fundamentally don't understand
about this is that you know if this
banana is the last town
and then you imagine just our river is
the size of a football field.
>> Mhm.
>> Right. [clears throat]
How are you going to get to the other
side of it in the jungle? It takes you
about about an hour to cover half a mile
through through dense jungle. If me and
you were going with machetes right now
through dense dense jungle, about an
hour for every half mile. That's with no
trail. With trail, you can go a little
faster. With a boat, you can go a little
faster. But the police have no
jurisdiction outside of the city. The
only reason the police have power is
because everyone has agreed that there's
a government and that they have power
and that there's a but it's all made up.
And when you go out in the jungle, you
realize that there is no law in the
wild. It's just whatever happens. It's
who has a bigger stick.
And so they're still playing by that
game. They've never heard of a law.
[snorts] And so they they've been known
to find something interesting just the
way and you know today if we're
interested in a bird, we take a picture
of it and then we study it or we can
capture it. We can study it. You know,
sometimes people will criticize Teddy
Roosevelt for being a hunter, but a lot
of the species, if he saw a new species,
he would shoot it so that he could study
it. That was what they did back then.
But they do this with humans. They'll be
like, "That's an interesting pair of
pants."
They seem to think about life and death
very differently.
>> And I was watching something um a
podcast that you did where you said that
they also speak the same language. some
of these unconted tribes is the monkeys.
>> Yes. Um so what they do is they will
emulate capacin calls, bird calls, the
unrelated tinn tinimu goes.
Um the capachens I can't do their call
but these guys have it down perfectly.
>> Capagans being
>> capagin monkeys
and they'll use those sounds. And JJ's
father Don Santiago had told us years
and years ago they said we thought he
was just trying to scare us. He said,
"If you're ever in the forest and you
hear the animals sound a little off, if
you ever just feel like something's not
right about the way the He" He said,
"They've surrounded you and they're all
watching with their bows and arrows."
>> The tribes have.
>> Yeah. And so they'll go
and you'll go and he'll go and you go,
"Wait, wait a sec." You don't hear three
tinus in a row. That's not how it works.
That one tineu talks to the other tineu
and all of a sudden I got five tinus
around me. Uh-uh. And then you know you
got the tribe around you. And so this is
where the local people know how this
stuff works. And to anyone from the
outside that goes, there's no such thing
as unconted tribes and they don't
communicate. Yeah, they do. And one of
my friends was in that exact situation
where they were communicating with
animal calls in a circle while he was in
a stream with his father
and unfortunately they shot his father
in the stomach and his father died. And
then he ran for it and he lived to tell
the tale. And the next day the his
community, our friends came back and
they found
this guy who had just bled out through
his stomach. And why they killed him, we
do not know.
>> So they pretend they're animals. Um but
well, they they use animal sounds to
communicate with each other.
>> Yes.
>> Because then the prey, which in this
case might be a human,
>> Yeah.
>> won't know that it's
>> exactly.
>> Okay. So, if I'm going if we go, okay,
let's split up and surround. We're we're
we're unconted tribes now. And we go,
okay, there's loggers over there. Let's
split up, surround them. We'll see how
many of them there are.
>> And use the monkeys language to
>> use the monkey language. They don't
think anything of it. They'll just keep
doing what they're doing. And then when
we give the go-ahad, everybody, we just
slice them with seven foot arrows and
they're all going down.
I was I was going to ask about
happiness, but I don't even know the
context in which to ask the question
about their happiness.
>> No, I think I think that there's some
some Coror Mc McCarthy quotes that would
probably do better justice to their
reality than the idea of happiness. I
think that they are living in a world
where they're more concerned with
calories. They're more concerned with
how much blood does it cost to walk a
mile. They're more concerned with
stealing the women from other tribes.
They're not concerned with happiness.
It's more apocalyptto than uh Downtown
Abbey. You know, it's it's they're
they're
in a state of desperation. You could see
it in their face.
And that's where there's a further
anthropological question of what happens
in the future for these people. But one
thing that we know for certain is that
rapid contact destroys them. It's
happened before. All of this has
happened before. You know, when the
outside world reaches an unconted tribe,
the pathogens kill them. When the
outside world reaches even an indigenous
community, alcohol, outside pathogens,
money can destroy an indigenous culture
and take away their language in a single
generation. So, so these types of of
severely isolated cultures, if they want
to come out and make contact with the
indigenous communities that are their
neighbors, that has to happen over time.
And and they have to have the agency to
do it, which means their forest needs to
be protected.
And so that's that's and that's all we
know. You know, we don't know what their
birth rates are, what their infant
mortality rates are, where their old
people are, what what what what are
their creation myths, what are their
beliefs? We have no idea.
>> Do we even know where they live in terms
of do they live in huts, houses? Do we
know that?
>> No, they don't. In fact, at this very
moment right now, uh I would imagine
that there's several of them hunched
around a campfire in the darkness
beneath 160 ft of canopy. You know,
because when you're in the jungle,
there's there's these these pillars
going up, but then it's a it's a 4D
environment because it's just you're
walking. It's like you're walking along
the bottom of the ocean. You're this
tiny thing. And above you is all of this
slithering life and frogs and things
moving through the branches. And so
they're they're huddled down there in
the and below the Amazon rainforest. And
somehow they figured out how to make
fire,
which if I handed you a lighter and a
full cup of gasoline and said, "Have all
the sticks you want in the jungle," you
still couldn't make me a fire right now.
>> How do you know they can make fire?
>> Because we see them cook stuff. We find
their camps. [sighs]
But it's also conceivable because they
don't have pots.
It's conceivable that that they some of
these people haven't seen water boil,
right? They just drink water and it
falls on them from the sky. They
certainly don't know that water freezes.
On this point of happiness, you said you
saw desperation in their faces, but does
that mean that you think they're not
happy,
>> or do you just think that
>> that isn't even a sort of a paradigm
that they even consider? It's all about
survival.
>> I think that we have we're inbuilt to
enjoy moments of joy. I think that
humans enjoy moments of interaction,
moments of play. And not just humans, I
think that animals in general. You look
at, you know, two puppies chasing each
other. They're having fun. You know,
even on even on this day with shotguns
loaded and bows cocked and we still
found the time to smile a little bit at
each other. Give me that machete. Yeah.
Yeah. Come and get it. And we kind of
like, you know, it was kind of like
you're just as scared of us as we are as
you. And it was it was a it was we were
on the same level for that smile,
>> you know? And I was like, oh, okay.
Yeah. None of us want to do that.
>> Um, and so there's there is happiness
there. But I'm saying, you know, uh
knowledge comes with benefits. You know,
there's a lot of things that they may
believe that I I remember when I was in
college reading about an anthrop
anthropologist group that got to
somewhere in New Guinea and all the
people were hiding in trees cuz they had
they'd gotten to a point in their
civilization where that where they
believed that everything that bad that
was bad came from magical spells. You
know, if I fall and break my leg, it's
cuz you set a magical spell on me and if
I get sick, it's because of a magical
spell. And everybody was so scared of
upsetting each other that they'd all
just started living in the trees and
hunting and they were living in this
constant fear state.
>> And so, you know, you at times like
that, you need someone to go, "Okay,
guys, look, here's what, you know,
here's what's happening. Let's get let's
get let's get on the same page." And
they may maybe they would be helped by
having a small plantation of plantains.
And so, if they have a bad week of
hunting,
they can just come in and they can they
can take some of their own make get some
of their own food. They don't need to
start being agricultural. They can still
be nomadic hunter gatherers, but maybe
having some supplemental food out there
in locations that they know about would
help. But these are things for the local
people and for anthropologists to figure
out over time.
>> I heard you say that children from the
tribe who were raised by outside
communities claim to remember nothing
about their time in the tribe.
>> It's haunting.
>> What do you mean by that? I mean that a
child washed down river on a log to one
of the very very remote communities in
the Amazon rainforest and was adopted by
an indigenous community, people that
speak an indigenous language as well as
Spanish. And when he was old enough to
be asked questions, someone said, "Hey,
by the way, when you were living with
Los Kalatos with the with the naked
people, that's what they call them. Um,
what was it like?" and he just went, "I
don't remember." And walked away. But I
mean, when he came down, he was 8 years
old.
You can't tell me you don't remember
anything. And but it was a it was a it
was a it was a guarded I don't remember.
It was a I don't remember. No. Access
denied.
[gasps]
It doesn't I mean, you got you know, and
that's what people get wrong where they
go, "Oh, these people still live, you
know, in communion with nature." And
it's like, yeah, and there's a lot of
rape and murder and warfare and probably
needless death from infections and
disease and and and they're living a
very different lifestyle, but
it certainly is fascinating that they're
out there. And I think that it only goes
to illustrate that we what we're
protecting here is truly that wild.
Because a lot of people will say to me,
well, how come you guys are so focused
on protecting this river? There's
thousands of tributaries in the Amazon.
Why protect this 300,000 acres right
there? It's like, well, this is the
wildest part. John Mirror took Teddy
Roosevelt on a camping trip when he
wanted him to protect the Yusede Valley
and the Sequoia trees. And he said, you
have to see this. And so, he took
Roosevelt and showed him how amazing it
was. I mean, sequoia trees like that
exist nowhere else on Earth. They're the
biggest trees on the planet. If he if
they hadn't protected them, they'd be
gone.
And so them having the foresight to
protect those trees, then we still have
sequoia trees. And so that's what we're
doing on this river. It's like by
protecting 300,000
acres of forest, we ensure that those
millennium trees, those skyscrapers of
life continue to have monkeys, reptiles,
amphibians, birds, mammals, that these
tribes continue to live out in the far
reaches. And then again to use the
football field analogy in this vast
expanse of wilderness, we found a way to
use just like a little pin prick to
actually bring people and let them see
this amazing place. And so we, you know,
the whole 99.99% of the thing is wild.
And we that's why we built that
treehouse to let you know some of our
donors, some of our people, cuz now
people from all over the world are
helping us save this river. and the
treehouse. That was a dream.
You know, there's a there's a mist river
that flows above the Amazon that's
invisible and it's larger than the
Amazon River itself.
There's an invisible mist river above
the Amazon that's larger than the river.
>> Mist.
>> Okay.
>> And so the first time I saw it, I had
climbed the tallest tree in the jungle,
which took hours. And I was standing on
a branch at dawn and I saw the sun
illuminate the mist river going across
the canopy.
And I went, I have to share this with
people.
And so we built that treehouse on a
promontory at the edge of the terrairma
looking out over the jungle so that
people can see the reserve, see all the
forest that they're protecting. Because
at this point, the way we've see this
and see that picture below it, that's
the wasteland. That's what happens when
you don't protect the Amazon.
Are you at all on some level jealous
of how these unconted tribes live? Is
there any part of you that wants to go
and experience their world for a day or
wishes you could
spend some time living how they live?
>> No.
>> No,
>> no. I really enjoy hanging out with my
native friends like when spending a day
piranha fishing. Um, but I also really
love my camera roll and doing
photography and having modern medicine
and being able to FaceTime my mom when
I'm in the jungle. Like, you know, I I
don't I don't I don't I no romanticism
about their state. That that seems like
stress and destiny. I don't I don't need
to I don't want I certainly don't want
to do that. Now,
>> is there anything that you learned or
gleaned from them that I know a
westerner like me who's spending a lot
of time on, I know, screens and stuff
and the way we live our lives might find
useful.
>> I don't think that that we're at the
point where they're imparting lessons. I
think we're we're at the point where
we're learning which questions we want
to ask. That was first contact.
And so, at this point, our job is to
figure out how do we how do we move
forward? What do we what do they need?
How do we ethically
proceed in protecting this forest?
>> I don't know any founder who started
their business because they like doing
admin. But whether you like it or not,
it's a huge part of running a business
successfully. And it's something that
can quickly become allconuming,
confusing, and honestly a real tax
because you know it's taking your
attention away from the most important
work. And that's why our sponsor Intuit
QuickBooks helps my team streamline a
lot of their admin. I asked my team
about it and they said it saves them
around 12 hours a month. 78% of Intuit
QuickBooks users say it's made running
their business significantly easier. And
Intuate QuickBooks new AI agent works
with you to streamline all of your
workflows. They sync with all of the
tools that you currently use. They
automate things that slow the wheel in
the process of your business. They look
after invoicing, payments, financial
analysis, all of it in one place. But
what is great is that it's not just AI.
There's still human support on hand if
you need it. Intuit QuickBooks has
evolved into a platform that scales with
growing businesses. So if you want help
getting out of the weeds, out of admin,
just search for Intuit QuickBooks. Now,
there's a phase a lot of companies hit
where they're no longer doing the most
important thing, which is selling. And
they get really bogged down with admin.
And it's often something that creeps up
slowly and you don't really notice until
it's happened. Slowly momentum starts to
leak out. This happened to us. And our
sponsor, Pipe Drive, was a fix I came
across 10 years ago. And ever since my
teams across my different companies have
continued to use it. Pipe Drive is a
simple but powerful sales CRM that gives
you the visibility on any deals in your
pipeline. It also automates a lot of the
tedious, repetitive, and timeconuming
parts of the sales process which in turn
saves you so many hours every single
month which means you can get back to
selling. Making that early decision to
switch to Pipe Drive was a real gamecher
and it's kept the right things front of
mind. My favorite feature is Pipe
Drive's ability to sync your CRM with
multiple email inboxes so your entire
team can work together from one
platform. And we aren't the only ones
benefiting. Over 100,000 companies use
Piperive to grow their business. So if
something I've said resonates, head over
to piperive.com/ceeo
where you can get a 30-day free trial.
No credit card or payment required. I've
got so many photos here.
>> What do you got? [laughter]
I mean, in so many of these photos,
you're holding massive snakes. And when
I say massive snakes, I don't mean the
snakes you guys listening are thinking
about. I mean, anaconda sized snakes
like, oh yeah, this was this was me and
JJ's first first big anaconda that we
big anaconda we caught. It was only
about 12 feet. And uh yeah, that one
that one this was a great snake because
I'd never caught a big snake before. I'd
always been, you know, you catch a small
snake and I'd learned from Steve Irwin,
you know, you catch a catch a snake by
the tail and it's it might try to bite
you. If you don't get it by the tail,
snake's going to run away every time.
Snakes are not never going to attack
you. Period. So, I learned you catch a
snake by the tail and then it's once you
get it by the tail, it's going to come
back at you and try and stop you from
grabbing its tail. Great. And if you
need to, you can get it by the head and
you got control of the snake. But if you
have the head, you have the snake. So
that first snake, I mean, I'm talking
about a 12ft snake that's, you know,
that's at least as thick as my leg. And
I ran in there and I said, "Jay, you
come from that side. I'm going to come
from this side. We get the snake. We're
going to measure it." Just because we
thought it was so fascinating. I ran in
and I dove and I grabbed the snake by
the head. Big mistake. Wraps around my
arms. And the first thing that I
realized was I had an anaconda
handcuffs. Now, I couldn't I couldn't
release the snake if I wanted to because
it was around my wrists. And then the
second coil came around my shoulders.
And now I'm feeling the I can actually
hear my collar bone start to flex the
way a stick sounds right before it
snaps. And JJ grabbed the snake by the
tail and pulled the tail off. And then
his other brother, they got to me right
as I was about to I mean literally the
eyes are going to come out of my head.
It was going to crush you. That's what
happens.
And so he pulled that right off at the
last second. So that was about as close
as I came to knowing what it feels like.
But that's not even a big one.
>> I think you came a little bit closer.
>> Yeah. No, that's that that's a
>> Explain this to me. So, for anyone that
can't can't see, I would highly
recommend you look at the screen now.
>> Um,
>> please look away. Look away. Don't
listen to him.
>> This is a an absolutely crazy story.
What What's going on in this photo? And
why did you do that?
>> Sure. This is actually a very important
story. You know, you hear these people
talk about how if you're going to
succeed at anything, you have to become
very familiar with losing. You almost
got to learn to love it.
And and so as we set out on this journey
to explore the Amazon and to build
relationships with the indigenous people
and to study anacondas and to find a way
to protect this place, at around 24
years old, I got approached by Discovery
Channel. And they said, "Kid,
we've never seen one like you. Let's do
a show where we take people into the
Amazon rainforest and show them
anacondas." And I said, "That'd be
amazing." I said, "I would love to do
that. I could teach people about the
forest. Let's let's go." They said,
'Great, the only thing is they said, you
know, it's not a good enough show if we
just show them the science that you're
going to do because we wanted to use as
the apex predators of the ecosystem,
they're, you know, if there's mercury in
the system, they're bioaccumulating
there. Any toxins that are in the
Amazon, they're going to absorb. It's
going to get into the fish and then into
the cayman, into the birds, into the
anacondas. They're the apex predator. We
were doing groundbreaking research on
anacondas.
They said that wasn't good enough. They
said, imagine if they said no one's, you
know, reticulated pythons have eaten
people. They said, "No one's ever had on
record an anaconda eating a human." And
I said, "It happens. It happens. I know
a few people whose grandmother or uncle
was eaten by an anaconda. It happens,
but it doesn't happen where people no
one's taking a picture of it." And so
they said, "Well, if we make you a
really expensive suit, will you get
eaten by an anaconda?" I said, "I'll
try." I said, "It's not going to eat.
Snakes are sweethearts. It's not going
to try to eat me." And they said, "But
look, we we'll call the show Expedition
Amazon. Send you out there with a team
of scientists. We'll film the whole
thing." Long story short, I agreed to it
because what I thought at the time was,
I keep seeing forest getting burned. I
keep seeing my millennium trees go down,
all of those monkeys and birds and
snakes and beautiful animals that are
getting incinerated. And they're telling
me all I got to do to get a TV show
that'll reach millions of people and let
me get that message out there. All I got
to do is at the end do this silly stunt
to show people that snakes aren't that
bad. And so we filmed this show for 6
weeks.
>> You agreed to what? I agreed to
potentially be eaten by an anaconda.
>> Okay.
I mean, if it wanted if it wanted to, I
had a breathing tube and I had a um it
theoretically could have eaten me, but I
knew it wouldn't cuz I know snakes. But
the producers were very, you know, these
are people that have never left the the
the office building and have watched too
many movies, and they wanted to see a
guy get eaten by a snake.
>> And you volunteered. Of course, I'd
volunteer. I would have cut off my foot
to save the forest. I'll do anything to
save the forest. And so, when somebody
gives you a chance like this, and it's
funny, I actually spoke to Jane Goodall
about this. I said, "There's this chance
I have, and I think I could use I think
I can navigate this in such a way that
that at the, you know, we take people on
an expedition through the Amazon, and at
the end, I'll go I'll get in the pit in
a special suit and I'll let the snake
wrap around me, and I'll show people
that anacondas are really these, you
know, sweethearts." And she said, "I
don't think it's going to go well." For
anyone that doesn't know who Jane
Goodall is,
>> Jane Goodall, the famous pimeatlogist,
the earthshattering scientist who
redefined humans from men, the toolmaker
to what we are now, the one who did more
for conservation, wildlife, women's
science than just about anybody else.
>> And she's also the um person that quoted
on the front of your book saying, "On
behalf of the forests that I love, thank
you, Paul, for writing this book."
Clearly from reading through your story,
she's um she's quite a hero of yours and
has been for a long long time.
>> Yeah. I mean, and going from when my
parents were reading us, me and my
sister, they'd be reading us stories at
night, you know, Jane Goodall and Gomebe
with the chimps and how she she didn't
listen to the rules, she named them.
Even though her her colleagues said,
"You never name your study subjects."
And she said, "They have names. They're
they have personalities. They have
names." She broke all the rules. And and
so I grew up with Jane as sort of this
historical
figure, but she was still like a living
historical figure. And so then when I
when I when I actually met her, it was
so incredible because I I met her at a
talk that she had given. And this this
informed the rest of my life. The the
the grace and wisdom that she showed
changed me as a person because I met her
at a talk that she was giving in New
York City. And I had printed out a
couple of chapters. I'd printed out one
of the chapters that became my first
book where I'm taking care of a baby
giant anteater.
And I had printed out a chapter where me
and JJ were looking for our first
anaconda, this story. And I put those
together with a little covered letter
that's just said, "Hey, I love wildlife.
I've been working in the Amazon for like
5 years and you've always been an
inspiration to me. If I write a book,
would you endorse it?" And so I gave
this to her in the manila envelope while
there was a line of 500 people and you
know we you take the picture and she
said thank you very much. She puts it
aside and I said all right you know I
tried my best and 48 hours later her her
team reached out and said Jane read the
material. She read the chapters and she
thinks that they're wonderful and if you
find a publisher let them know that Jane
will endorse your book. And so then I
went to the publishers and I said I have
the endorsement of Jane Goodall and they
said well that's basically Mother Earth
herself. [laughter] Mhm.
>> And they said, "So, so that's what got
me in the door to become an author with
my first book was Jane. You know, she's
she was this titan of conservation, this
legendary figure. And her just first of
all, for someone that was on the road
300 days a year, that's an icon of
science and conservation and hope. For
her to have the presence of mind and the
patience and the sense of responsibility
to actually read something that some kid
handed her, that's incredible. That's
magic to me even to this day. And it and
it matters to me and it informs how I
act even to this day.
But without Jane sort of waving her wand
in my direction, I would have no career.
There would be no Paul, no Jungle
Keepers, no book. We wouldn't be sitting
at this desk today. Jane Goodall saved
my life.
>> She's an iconic scientist, as you say,
um known for groundbreaking research on
chimpanzees and her work generally and
globally on on conservation. Um, so you
you decide that you're going to be eaten
by an anaconda.
>> Oh, yeah. That was a tangent. Yes.
>> So, is this a wild anaconda or is this
an anaconda held in captivity?
>> How did you get the anaconda to eat you?
>> So, let me see that next one on the
picture.
>> This one?
>> Yeah. This is a snake called Eleanor.
And we we named her this after my dear
grandmother, who was an incredible woman
and uh and uh the matriarch of our
family. Now, Eleanor is the largest
snake ever measured at the time,
verifiably, scientifically measured. She
was 18' 6 in and over over 100 kilos.
And she was skinny. She hadn't eaten in
a while. But imagine if she'd eaten a
Cappy bar, she would have been, you
know, 200 kilos. But um my team caught
her while we were filming this show. And
again, we were told the show would be
called Expedition Amazon. The call sheet
said expedition EA.
Then when we were done doing our
research in the Amazon, they said,
"Look, fly to I forget if it was like
Kentucky or Louisiana." They said, "F
fly to some state. There's a guy with a
snake. No one will know the difference.
We'll blur it out." And they said, "Do
this little stunt." I said, "We'll put
it the last five minutes of the show
just to show people and then we'll, you
know, we'll hype it up in the news."
They're like, "We got you." A lot of
handshakes, right? And the day before I
was supposed to go on the Good Morning
America show with uh Mr. Matt Lowauour,
who got mad at me for doing push-ups on
the set. Um, the the day before I was
supposed to go on the show, I'm here
again. I'm a kid and I'm going, I I
think I think we got it. I think we did
it. We caught the biggest snake ever.
The footage of us catching that snake is
insane. We're all jumping in the river
and wrestling this kraken and we catch
this snake and we learned from her. We
did, we were, it sounds crazy, but we
were developing field methodology for
studying the species and we learned all
kinds of things about anacondas because
we fed her a transmitter. learned how
she moves through the environment. This
is research that had never been done
before.
>> For context, feeding her a transmitter
is putting a trans an electrical device
>> basically in her throat that she eats,
she consumes, and it stays with her till
she dies. So, you can see what she's
doing.
>> It stays with her until she defecates
it, which for snakes that thankfully is
months.
>> Okay?
>> And so, we're doing this groundbreaking
research. We caught this tremendous
snake. We' survived a six week
expedition in the Amazon. We had all
this incredible footage.
And the night before I'm supposed to go
out on the morning shows,
they showed me the film. It had none of
the science.
It had none of the conservation message
that I was promised would be in the
show. And instead, they focused on the
stunt at the end. And they changed the
name of the show to eaten alive. And
then they sent me out the door to do the
shows.
And the public was mad because I didn't
actually get eaten and they felt like
they were lied to. PETA was mad because
they felt like I had put a a snake's
life in danger somehow. Somehow somehow
the animal rights people were furious.
And then the scientists were mad because
they said, "Okay, you're just a you know
a a
shock person. You're just in in this for
the thrill and you're not really a
conservationist." So it put me out of
work for years.
>> Really?
>> Yes. It set me back about 10 years.
>> Really? I tried I took a big swing
because I thought it would help my
forest and I hit my head on the ceiling
and fell down hard. The next day the
news I mean you know all of the late
night shows were making fun of it. Jimmy
Kimmel was like you for your next stunt
you should try having sex with a hippo.
I mean people the comments were just I
went to India and lived with the herd of
elephants for a while. I mean I had to
get out. I couldn't I literally
couldn't. I said my dream of being a
conservationist is over. I was told by
one prominent conservationist not even
to come to South America.
And and again, the thing you have to
remember through all of this is through
the barefoot machete days, through going
to the Amazon,
the first
15 years of my 20-year journey, I had no
support.
>> So, [clears throat] I was living out of
a backpack, living out of a boat in the
Amazon barefoot with no paycheck, no
health insurance, no security, no
pathway forward. Um, so it it was it was
very uncertain times. You know that you
actually I think it may have been on
your show. There's this great quote
where I think it was Alex Hormosi was
saying that confidence comes from giving
people irrefutable proof that you are
who you say you are. And when I heard
that quote I thought that's great. And
then the next thing I thought was well
but you have to start building that
proof in a direction. And for a lot of
people, I think they find themselves
standing on a high hill looking at a set
of mountains and you have to choose
which direction you're going in. And for
me, I was a high school dropout who was
never going to be a conservation
biologist.
And I was trained by the local people
and sort of adopted by their tribe. And
so I knew how to survive in the jungle
and work with snakes and do all these
crazy things. And I tried I tried to to
take that message to television and I
got Hollywooded hard. I got lied to and
I got taken for a ride. But that failure
ended up being the best thing that ever
happened because what it did was it sent
me right back to the drawing board. Said
you're not ready yet. And so sometimes
the things that you want are not the
things that you need. And it's this
beautiful thing where life sort of moves
aside I know I know I know you want that
but I'm I'm going to give you what you
need, not what you want. And so this was
a case where I really I took it hard. I
mean, at the time it was a devastating
loss
and it was the best thing that ever
happened because it it was the slap on
the head that sent me back out into the
jungle for years and years and years of
of more experience. Double down. What do
you really care about saving the forest?
Well, if you care about saving the
forest, how the hell are you going to do
that? And we had to develop a system to
do that. We had to develop a new
technology as a way to save the forest.
What actually happened here?
>> So, we didn't I know you don't want to
It sounds like you don't don't want to
talk about it.
>> It's just wasted air time to talk about
it because we we rolled around on in the
mud with a 16 ft anaconda and nothing
happened.
>> A lot of people will probably want to
know why nothing happened. And I think
part of that is because of what you're
wearing.
>> No, the reason nothing happened is
because they had snake handlers wrapping
the snake around me while I was in this
ridiculous suit. Um, I mean, the things
I will do, the things I will do to
protect this forest, that snake, if it
was left on its own, would crawl off.
Any snake would would, if there was, if
I had a black mamba in my hands right
now and I put it on this table, it would
slide off the table and find the darkest
spot in the room and it would go hide.
If I had a spitting cobra, same thing.
No snake wants to deal with you. They
just want to go hide. They want to go
back to sleep.
>> Most people are terrified of snakes.
>> Most people are terrified of snakes. And
that's why I think you're going to like
what I have for you.
>> What do you mean?
>> I brought a friend today.
>> You brought a friend?
>> I did bring a friend and I want you to
meet him.
Now, this
is a very, very small ball python. This
is a baby. And one of the first things I
try to impress upon people when they
meet a baby snake is remembering that
even if you're scared of snakes, you're
the large apex predator. And this is
just a tiny little reptile that is all
alone in the world. They're born and
they have to fend for themselves.
And for some reason, ever since I was a
little kid, I was fascinated with
snakes. I thought they were beautiful. I
love the way they moved. I thought the
way they can hold up their bodies and
flick their tongues. I find snakes
calming and beautiful and fascinating.
>> Is that snake dangerous?
>> You could hand this snake to a baby.
This snake is so harmless. I mean, the
worst thing that this snake could do if
I was to, let's just say, pinch her and
hurt her. She could bite me, but even
that would barely break my skin.
This is a snake that's going to look for
baby mice, little birds, maybe a frog,
and try and grow to a larger size. Now,
have you ever held a snake before?
>> No.
>> You've never held a snake?
>> I don't think so. No.
>> Oh, wow. That's wonderful. Well, this is
such an easy one to start with, and I'll
give you a few pointers.
>> My hands are sweating over.
>> So, a few things is that even a baby
baby snake is going to interpret your
inner state a little bit. if you're very
nervous and jittery and the snake is
gonna pick up on that. But you see how
she's sort of just fitting to my hand.
Yeah, she's done a few things here.
She's got her anchor. She's got her tail
around these two fingers. And the next
thing is she's flicking her tongue to
sense what's going on. She's she's
looking around, but she's also
she's not excited.
>> She doesn't mind sweat.
>> She doesn't mind sweat. My hands sweat
quite a bit as well. And so I'm just
going to place her in your hand nice and
easy. And what you want to do is let her
sort of grab on now. Now, what are you
feeling right now? Let's just see what
she does.
>> I feel a little bit tense.
>> That's okay. You can feel tense. Now, if
you feel tense, the thing is she's
probably going to return to me because
she probably knows I love her.
And
>> I think she's right.
>> Yeah. And that's okay. Why don't we just
let her do that? And then you can get a
sense for how she moves. And I'm going
to give her a little hole to crawl
through like that. And so what they do
is they have all these muscles
>> running along their body and you can
feel that, right?
>> Such a beautiful animal, I do have to
say.
>> Yeah. They're called ball pythons. They
also call them royal pythons for that
that beautiful black and gold.
>> It's Can I Can I touch it with my thumb?
>> You can. They don't love being pet.
That's one thing about snakes. They
don't A lot of people when they come
around to suddenly loving snakes, they
go, "Well, I want to pet it the way I
want to pet a dog." And snakes will
retract from that. So if you do it,
touch her with your with your thumb. See
how she moves away?
>> She moved away. Yeah,
>> she moves away. She doesn't like that.
So usually with snakes, my my my rule is
you you sort of have to be the be the
tree.
>> Okay. And is she a baby?
>> Absolutely. These are these this is
quite small. And so in the jungle on
cold days, I'll find snakes like this
and literally warm them up in my hands.
I'll put them in here. And just if you
can just look at that. Just look at how
sweet she is. She'll just stay like
that.
>> She likes that.
>> She likes that. She likes the warmth
there. We are end. They are ectotherms.
Like all reptiles, they depend on their
environment for their body temperature.
And so on the cold days, see that? See
that? I move my hand closer.
>> She got a little spooked. She went back
into the
>> Again, this is just a tiny baby. There's
another one that is a similarly awesome
example.
This is her larger
relative. Same species, right? So, this
is a small ball python and this is a
larger ball python. And notice that both
of these there's no risk, right? There's
no there's no danger here. It's not like
I can't put these near my face. Again,
both of these are sort of the golden
retrievers of snakes. These are these
are snakes that have been handled by
responsible snake owners. So, will that
small one grow into the big one or you
saying they're the same sort of cousins?
>> Yeah, this is a larger ball python. This
is a smaller ball python.
>> So, this one will eventually be the
size.
>> Absolutely. And this one could could
grow to be double that size. Really?
I've seen ball pythons be double that
size.
Now, this one
slightly different game for holding.
But see, like that. Look who's scared
here. Me. Well, and and him.
And so, look at that. He's beautiful.
So, look, I'll just give you a sense of
look at the power in a python.
You think pull-ups are hard. He's
holding on with no no legs, no claws,
just strength.
And he's just going to climb back up on
onto my arm.
So, what I'd like you to do is hold out
your wrist.
Yeah, you got this.
Just straight across the table. Hold
that right like that. Now, remember, if
he does bite,
>> you mean if he doesn't
>> I'm kidding. I'm kidding. Just hold him
up high enough that he's not touching
the table. Yeah. And then I'm just going
to coax him up. He's okay. You're okay.
You're okay. You're all right. You're
all right. There we go. There we go. So,
he's just gonna just just feel that
power as he moves, which he will
eventually.
But, see, you can feel the power on this
snake. It's a little bit more of a
>> a little bit more musculature.
>> They are stunning.
You see that? That's it. He's like,
"Okay, cool. You're holding me here."
They're pretty relaxed animals. So,
he'll go and eat a small prey item, go
back into his burrow, and then digest
for a week before going back out. And
now you Now, if you want, you can take
your other hand and put it under him to
support him. And then he'll start to
move over both of your hands. Why don't
you try that? Put your other hand very
gently right under his coil right there.
He got scared of that. That's okay.
Or you could put a thumb through the
through the loop.
>> Could do, couldn't I?
>> Yeah, you could do that. You're loving
all these suggestions.
All right, now watch. Let's see what
happens when you put him on the table.
Cuz I bet you anything he doesn't enjoy.
You feel that power? You feel that
little bit of power there?
>> Yeah.
>> Now that's a snake this big. Wait till
you see like with an anaconda or
something.
Now a table's sort of unfair. There's
nothing for him to see this. He's going
to he's going to flop a little bit.
There's they're not supposed to be on a
table. So, this is what I'll do. I'll be
the
I'll be the ground cuz then see look now
he's pushing with all those little belly
scales. See how he can cruise
that incredible snake locomotion. Now
watch if I take away his look. He's
holds on. They don't want to. Now he's
got nothing to push off of. So he's
gonna he's going to do the inchworm
thing.
But you get a sense of how snakes move.
They need that. They need the ground.
They need pebbles. They need rocks. Now
you Now catch him.
Oh, come on, Mike. Catch him now. No,
seriously. Not by the head. Start by the
tail. Just right here. Just pick him up.
And then once you pick him up, you can
give him to me and then we can be done.
But but Stephen, you have to catch the
snake.
>> Pick pick him up here.
>> Just pick him up.
>> He's not going to do anything
>> now. Nice and slowly, too, cuz he's a
friendly snake. You don't want to offend
him.
>> He seems to be tense.
>> I mean, he is side eyeing you right now.
>> That's what I mean. He seems like I'm
side eyeing him. He's side eyeing me.
But I'm telling you that the snake, all
you got to do is just pick them up.
>> And then when I pick him up, what do I
do?
>> Just pick them up and hand them to me.
That's all you got to do. And then this
is all over.
>> Oh my god. I can't believe this.
>> Oh my god.
>> Beautiful. Right up up up up. Amazing.
Wonderful. Now I'm going to take him.
[laughter]
>> All right. And then I have one more
snake that I really need you to meet.
Come here. You can't hold on to that.
This
This is a different story. And this is
sort of the closest thing that we're
going to get
to an anaconda.
I think the easiest thing I could do
here is just let her get around my neck.
>> What the [__] is my life?
>> So now what you don't want snakes to do
is to close that gap, right? You don't
want them to wrap around your neck.
>> Could she kill you? She could.
>> Then don't bring it over here.
>> Well, I thought I thought you wanted to
meet her, too. [laughter]
>> But what what if she does something to
me?
>> No, no. So, this is a different type of
snake. This is a Burmese python.
And when you talk about large
constrictors, those are small
constrictors, the the ball pythons. This
is a larger constriction constrictor.
And Burmese pythons get to be big. These
can go up to 18 ft long. And now what I
think you're going to really appreciate
is the power that these things have when
you feel that power. And now just don't
move. [sighs and gasps] Yeah. Now give
her your hand. Take her take her with
your hand. Good.
Very good. Now hold this hand out. Good.
Just like that. Now be the tree. Just be
the tree. That's great. Yep. You want to
come this way, girl? Come here. Her tail
is hot.
>> Yeah.
>> Why? Why is the tip hot?
>> Maybe she likes you.
>> Okay, now she's just going to move
behind your head. And I just want you to
feel the muscles of that snake.
>> What was that?
>> Oh, yeah. That's great.
>> Is she hissing?
>> She's breathing. That's just her
breathing cuz she's holding on. She's a
ground snake. She's not really a tree
snake.
Now, Burmese pythons, they grow to be
18t long. They can take down deer.
And so what you have right now is this
beautiful granite Burmese python
crawling on your shoulders. And you're
doing great, by the way. You look very
calm. Breathe. Don't forget to breathe.
>> And she can kill a deer.
>> No, no, she'll grow. She's still a baby.
She's still small. She'll eventually be
able to kill a deer. Now I just I don't
want her to. Now, here's the thing.
[snorts] I think she likes you.
And so when I try to take her,
>> the strength.
>> The strength. Yeah.
>> She could like break my pinky finger
off.
>> Yeah. So, let's just see what we do. So,
we know a few things. We know that she's
not going to hurt us. We know she's not
going to eat that banana. I know she'd
like her probably. Come on. You want to
come up, girl? Yeah. See, I think they
come to me. I think they know.
You hear that? You hear that breathing?
Have you ever done a podcast with a
with a 10-ft snake across the table
before?
>> No, this is my first.
>> This is amazing. It's such a It's such a
joy to be here with a Burmese python
there.
>> So, I really This is the closest I can
get you to an anaconda. I wouldn't bring
an anaconda here. Their personality is a
little different.
>> Their personality is different.
>> Oh, yeah. Different snake species just
like you'd be a little bit more careful
around certain dog species than you
would others. Certain snakes. Now,
notice, look, now I'm I'm I'm pulling a
good deal here and she's not budging.
So, now what you're going to do is just
just massage the tail.
>> What you mean massage? I would like you
to massage the tail.
Just Just maybe rub back and forth on
her tail and there's going to be an
instant reaction. Yep. Just keep doing
that. She's not going to love that. Oh,
she's hissing
>> because there might be something back
here that she can't see.
>> Well, exactly. She doesn't want
something interacting with her tail.
>> She seems to be stuck to my the the
diary.
>> The diary itself.
>> Okay, girl. Okay, girl. Okay, girl.
>> She doesn't like that.
>> Well, actually, why don't you just lift
her lift that coil over up onto the
table? You got this. Just like you
lifted the other snake. You're going to
have to do this to get through this.
>> Just lift.
>> No. See the part that's hanging over?
Just lift it up onto the table.
>> Oh my gosh.
>> Yeah.
>> Oh my gosh. It's so
>> How would you describe it?
>> It's like
really soft, but then like you feels
like pure muscle.
>> Pure muscle. Yeah. She's very She's This
is a very very strong snake. It's so
heavy. I can't even pull it up.
>> I I need I need you to try.
>> I think she's resisting.
>> Come on. You're not going to hurt her.
Just right around the edge of the table.
Just up onto the table.
>> I can't. It's too
>> Come on. You got this. You got yourself.
Pretend we're in the Amazon. And this
snake is strangling me to death. And the
only way to save my life is to take that
snake's tail up.
>> But David,
>> she's gripping to just [laughter] take
>> MY EYES ARE POPPING OUT OF MY HEAD.
>> NO, I'M BEING SERIOUS. SHE'S LIKE, SHE I
can't I can't move her off. She's like,
>> "Yes, you can." Come on. Pull her out.
Bring her around. You got this. Look at
your arms.
>> I know. I know. I'm scared.
>> You got this. You got this. Believe in
yourself. Come on. Get her up.
Just Just do it. There. There is no try.
>> She doesn't want then. I'm going to die.
>> Don't make Don't make me come over to
the other side of that snake and get
her. Come on. You got Yeah. There we go.
There we go. That wasn't so bad.
She's wrapped around the diary again.
She's got inside the diary.
>> Okay, listen. The diary has to remain
intact, girl.
>> So, yeah, this is
>> this is a beautiful, beautiful snake.
But you sort of see how people have a
misconception about snakes. Now, what
she's trying to do right now, even this
snake that knows what what humans are,
she's just trying to say, "All right,
get me out of here." You know, she's
going, "Where can I go rest?"
>> And what what does she eat when she
grows up? What do these
>> Well, Burmese pythons, they get big. So,
she's going to start with rats and birds
and frogs, and they start small. They
start just like the ball python. But
when she gets big, you're talking about,
I mean, Burmese pythons, deer, dogs,
>> humans.
>> Uh, Burmese pythons, I don't think, are
confirmed eating humans. Reticulated
pythons, which is actually the longest.
Interesting fact, anacondas are the
biggest snake on Earth. Reticulated
pythons are the longest and they're the
only ones that are on YouTube
having eaten humans. They're confirmed
maneaters,
but these berms, they're just big,
powerful snakes and they're
>> they're pretty placid.
>> It's such a beautiful animal, even
though it is a little bit scary um for
some reason.
>> Yeah.
>> I think maybe because we've all grown up
watching films like anaconda that we
think of snakes as being
>> terrifying, but it's such a beautiful
>> I see what you mean with the table.
Yeah, exactly.
>> She's really in there. Yeah. Yeah.
>> All right. Maybe you were right. See,
this is interesting. Anacondas have
bigger.
>> Yeah. They don't like being touched on
the head and they don't like um they
don't like their
>> cloa touched the base of their tail,
their vent.
>> Should people be scared of snakes? Do
you
>> I think people should be respectful of
snakes the same way you're respectful of
heights. Go get Steven. Good girl.
Good girl. Go get him. Go get the diary.
>> Would she eat the banana? No, no, they
are what we call obligate carnivores.
They can only eat uh other animals,
but I mean, whatever they can fit.
Unfortunately, Burmese pythons have been
introduced to Florida and there's no
predators in Florida that can handle the
Burmese python. So, they're eating the
alligators, the birds, the native
wildlife. They've become a terrible
invasive species, which is sort of bad
PR for Burmese pythons. But when they're
in their native habitat of Southeast
Asia, they're just wonderful big apex
predator snakes.
>> Can she bite?
>> 100%. They have big teeth. If she was to
bite one of us right now, it would draw
quite a bit of blood.
I mean, she has to be able to latch on
to her prey, right? So, all the more
credit goes to her for not doing that.
Go get Steven. Good girl.
Good girl.
>> Maybe you should have the head down that
end.
>> I think I think See, now what I'm doing
is I'm massaging the tail because I know
that she's going to go for you.
Good girl. Yeah. Right at him. Right at
him. [laughter] Now, come on. Come on.
Let her get.
Yes. Good girl.
Oh, this is so great.
This Burmese python is wants to know
what is inside the diary of a CEO.
She's trying to hide.
>> Yeah, she is trying to hide. And so, you
know what? We're going to let her do
that. She's been a very good sport. And
I'm going to take her away.
>> That's fantastic.
>> It is a be It's such a majestic animal.
Like, I [clears throat]
slightly scary, but also
>> going to hand her over the cameras.
>> Make sure you keep what I'm about to say
to yourself. I'm inviting 10,000 of you
to come even deeper into the diary of a
CEO. Welcome to my inner circle. This is
a brand new private community that I'm
launching to the world. We have so many
incredible things that happen that you
are never shown. We have the briefs that
are on my iPad when I'm recording the
conversation. We have clips we've never
released. We have behind the scenes
conversations with the guest and also
the episodes that we've never ever
released and so much more. In the
circle, you'll have direct access to me.
You can tell us what you want this show
to be, who you want us to interview, and
the types of conversations you would
love us to have. But remember, for now,
we're only inviting the first 10,000
people that join before it closes. So,
if you want to join our private closed
community, head to the link in the
description below or go to
daccircle.com.
I will speak to you there. What would
you say to a young person who's probably
in the pursuit of a completely different
dream? Are there anything that you
consider to be transferable for anyone
in the pursuit of their dreams that you
learned in those 15 years in your
barefoot machete days?
Yeah, I think that that you have to log
your time as a beginner in order to earn
your time as a master.
And there's this beautiful saying that I
start the book with which is that the
master has failed more times than the
beginner has even tried.
And that to me is beautiful. And so it's
like when I went down there and began
even trying to catch a fish, you know, I
didn't know how to do anything. and and
and I would look at these conservation
biologists and and just think, "My god,
I'm never going to be one of them
because I'm never going to have the
grades to be a conservation biologist."
Now, at the point we're at now where we
are, we have this global movement around
conservation, we have this huge
conservation organization that's
fighting to do something historic, I do
get messages from kids all over the
world that say, "I I I really want your
job, or I want to get out there and I
want to do I want to follow my dreams."
What would you say to them?
>> Well, I had a kid recently that he he
messaged me and he said, 'I really want
to study great whites. And he said, "But
marine biology is so competitive and and
none of the professors will give me, you
know," and I said, "Listen, forget all
that." I said, "Do your school. Get it
done." I said, "But go to the dock. Find
out where the preeminent marine
biologists are going to go do their
great white research. Go to that dock.
Help them with their bags. Get off your
phone. Get off the internet. Stop asking
permission. get on your feet and go
there to the waves. And sooner or later,
they're going to need help with their
bags. Sooner or later, they might invite
invite you on the boat. And after you've
been helping with their bags and invited
on the boat, maybe you take some
pictures of a pivotal moment that they
use to communicate their work to the
world. At some point, you can find a way
to make yourself useful to them. And if
you do that for long enough, you might
just end up being somebody that's a core
member of their team. People at those
family barbecues must have asked you if
you had a plan B.
>> Are you a fan of plan B's?
>> I think I actually think that I'm not
the example to follow because I went so
I had I burned the boats. I had no plan
B and and and now as I'm sitting across
the table from you, it's very easy. I
remember being younger and hearing these
people and you listen to a successful
business person go, you know, if I could
do it, then anyone could do it. If it
could happen to me, then shut up. You
already made it. Like and it's like if
you if you read the pages of that book
and how many times I almost died, had
infections, almost fell off a cliffs,
got bitten by animals. Also, the the
internal struggle of then being 32,
you know, 18, they oh, go follow your
dreams. 25, they're like, yeah, that's
cool. And then something happened when I
was around 32, 33, that was sort of the
the lower point for me, right? My dad
was dropping me off somewhere one day
and and and my dad would always always
supporting me, bringing me to the
jungle, taking me to the airport,
bringing me home. I didn't have the
money to get myself there with taxis and
Ubers and stuff. And
but there came this moment where, you
know, I'd written my first book.
Harper College. I've gotten a real
publisher. The book came out and it went
nowhere.
So even that I'd tried to be, you know,
on Discovery Channel. I'd tried to write
a book. I wrote a good book. I knew
people liked it. It had a high rating.
Didn't do anything. That didn't change
anything. I'd started an organization. I
started jungle keepers. I'd turned
loggers into and gold miners into
conservation rangers. We protected like
50,000 acres of rainforest, but still
there was some feeling like like it just
wasn't, you know, you're striking flint
and like it's just not the fire is not
catching. There's something missing. It
wasn't happening. He my dad went,
you know, we love you no matter what.
Ah. [sighs] And I went, "Don't do this."
He said, "No, no, no. You know, you
know, if you eventually," he goes, "If
you need to jump ship and start over,"
he's like, "You know, we'll help you
with whatever you need." And I said,
"What do you mean start over?" And he
was like, "Well, you know, I mean, what
are you going to do this jungle guy
thing forever?" And I went, "Oh, God.
Oh, God." Like, no. And you know, and
then he said, "And if and if you do need
to do that forever, it's okay." And it's
like, but they they didn't they couldn't
conceptualize it. And it was very soon
after that that that on that graph. It
was very very soon after that. It was
actually right at the point that I quit
right before COVID. And this is this is
sort of the the lowest point that I was
supposed to never tell anybody. And I
wrote about it in the book where before
CO when CO hit, I couldn't get to the
jungle. Our whole team had CO. Peru was
the hardest hit country in the world. I
mean all of my staff, my friends, my
family in Peru, they were all on oxygen
tanks. Whose mother whose sister whose
daughter was dying? We bankrupted
ourselves sending money. We the whole we
took the whole ecoourism businesses sent
all the money to Peru to get our friends
oxygen tanks and to keep our family
alive. And
it was also during that time that I
realized I have nowhere to go like in
this world. I was like I don't make
sense in this world anymore.
And I I called my best friend. I called
Mosen my best friend. I said and I said
don't I said don't tell anybody what I'm
about to say but I said I'm going to go
get a job. I said, "I've been doing this
for so long. I tried really hard. I
tried for 15 years." I said, "I'm out of
gas. I I'm out of I'm out of ideas. I
have I have been burning so bright. I've
been making making the fire myself."
I said, "I got nothing. I got no more
ideas." And of course, he said, "You
shut up." He said, "You inspired me. You
started Jungle Keepers. You know, I
don't want to ever hear this from you
getting hung up on me." But I said, but
I told him, I said, "I quit." I said,
"I'm out. I'm done. I'm done. I have no
hope left.
And exactly a week after I made that
phone call where I quit, our first big
funer reached out. A billionaire named
Dax Silva had seen my video of saying
the Amazon is destroying and we have the
people. We have the plan. We have the
infrastructure. All we need is the
funding and we can save this river. And
the week after I quit in the in the
alchemy of the universe, that's when he
called me and said, "You know what?
Green light. Let's do it. How about a
five-year commitment where I fund jungle
keepers and we turn the local ranger,
the local loggers and gold miners into
conservation rangers. We get you and
some of your guys a salary and we make
this whole thing viable. And by the way,
let's protect another 100,000 acres of
forest.
And if we hadn't spent years and years
and years chipping at the same piece of
granite, just just whether or not you
can hammer through granite depends
whether or not you continue to whack the
hammer. And so for me and JJ, for Mosen,
who was sort of the first iteration, the
first person that came and and took the
photos that allowed us to communicate
all of those photos of burning forest
and the wreckage. He was the first guy.
He came in the barefoot machete days and
he said, I mean, that was at a time
where I didn't even know anything was
ever going to happen. And he said, you
know, what you guys are doing here is
special. We have to show it to the
world. And so on that graph, nothing
nothing nothing. And then a little blip,
all of a sudden, we had a funer. And
then once you once you get a funer, when
when you're when you're doing it all by
yourself, nobody's rooting for you. And
then once you once you start once you
start to get a little momentum and a
little notoriety, all of a sudden then
everybody comes. So then then I quit.
And that was the lowest point. And then
all of a sudden he rescued us and we
started going up and then we started
sharing it and then we got to the United
Nations and then we got to and all of a
sudden we started gaining this momentum
and that that that that magic that Jane
had given us with her words also served
as as sort of a blessing that carried us
forward because people said well if Jane
Goodall gave you this Excalibur sword of
her blessing
then then go forth and save the Amazon
and everything changed. How do people
know
in the pursuit of their dreams whether
they should throw in the towel or not?
Like how based on your experience there,
if someone came to you and said, "Look,
I've been I've been doing something for
a long time and I don't know whether to
keep going or not." Is there a framework
or an idea that you might offer them?
I think that
in my case
if I follow the rational advice I would
fail.
If I was giving myself advice as a
rational person I would say after the
first 10 years
cut your losses and stop like what are
you doing? It doesn't make any sense cuz
then even after 15 years what am I going
to do? Go then enter the workforce with
no skills and no resume and no nothing.
I just it was getting more and more
extreme. And I was like, "Okay, well,
I'm just going to be this Jack Sparrow
jungle character." I don't know,
for for everyone, it's going to be
different. But I can tell you this much,
if you're not willing to go allin,
you're not going to win. Like, you have
to take that risk to get that reward.
And so, you go, "Okay, I've been I've
been I've been doing this thing for 10
years, and and I just Well, you're 100%
not going to get it if you stop. But at
the same time, there's this haunting
quote in the in the Razer's Edge, this
book, where they say, "Many are called
and few are chosen." And I think that
goes for whether you're starting a
business or a band or trying to be a
writer or whatever it is. It's you have
to know when it's when it ceases to be
chasing your dreams and becomes sort of
a sad suicide. And then and then you
know at what point I was very worried
that it was going to become my identity
that I was the jungle guy so I'd just
keep being the jungle guy
>> and then there's no getting out of it.
I'd have to do it because I said I
would. And so I think for people maybe
having an option B is a good idea. That
might be one of the things that I
learned is that having some sort of an
option B might be good. This is um as
you've highlighted the great risk of
giving people advice when you've reached
the top of the mountain
>> because it's easy from the top of the
mountain to recite how you managed to
climb. But you you like even when I
think about myself as a podcaster like
if someone came and asked me
>> how do you build a podcast or how do you
build a business whatever
>> I probably won't point at the luck and
the timing and the fortune as much. I'll
point at the things that I did
intentionally. Um, and I'm completely
unaware of the fact that actually, you
know, even with the podcast, like
starting a podcast in 2020 when we first
came to YouTube was like the perfect
timing.
>> Yeah.
>> And at the time, we didn't know it was
the perfect timing.
>> Yeah.
>> We were just out there on the wave and
then as it came into shore.
>> Mhm.
>> And so, but you look at the statistics
and go, look, there's a lot of people
that want to be conservters
or entrepreneurs, whatever.
>> Most of them
don't make it. So, they're not sat here
talking. They're not they're not here
now.
>> Yes.
>> Because they, you know, something
happened, they gave up, they couldn't
make it, the business went bust.
>> And there's a really interesting I'm
probably going to butcher this, but it's
an interesting story I read about these
fighter jets. I think it was in World
War I. And um you might have heard the
story. These fighter jets come back with
holes in them. So, everybody sat there,
all these engineers said, "Well, if we
want to figure out how to make better
fighter jets, let's study where the
bullet holes are because then we know
where people are shooting."
>> So, they took the jets down. and they
looked at where the bullet holes were
and they said, "We'll reinforce those
sections." An engineer at the back, and
I've forgotten his name, but I'll put
them up on the screen, shouted out,
"Shouldn't we look at where there isn't
holes
>> because where there isn't holes, those
ones didn't come back?"
>> And this is the whole the problem with
survivorship bias
>> is actually maybe you should be getting
advice from the people in the graveyard,
not the people that came back. Maybe you
should be looking at where the whole the
bullets didn't hit because that's the
fatal area if that makes sense. And I
think there's a lot. It's really in the
last couple of years I've got more
cautious about giving people advice for
the same reasons you said.
>> Yeah. I mean, you got to remember every
one of the frozen bodies on Everest were
once a highly motivated rich person that
thought they could succeed
and now they're an icicle. Mhm.
>> And so I mean it's surreal to be sitting
here especially today on the day that I
got the news that this book is a New
York Times bestseller.
And again now I'm immediately I'm I'm
I'm having that reaction to myself where
I'm going don't give advice because they
they should not do that that I did very
dangerous things there. Very very
dangerous things including risking my
life. Not I don't mean risking my life
with anacondas and risking my life with
being hunted by narco traffickers. I
mean risking spending my life doing
something that would have no benefit.
Risking spending my life simply just
being an adventurer. Great. Okay. Well,
how am I contributing? The whole thing
was that I wanted to have purpose. I
wanted to have a meaning and and change
things. And so I I this is not a
blueprint for people to do what I did.
It's a blueprint of oh look what this
person did. But people have to I mean
that's the whole game, right? That's the
other thing we've become very precious
about, you know, curating our lives and
making sure. But you know what, one
thing that the unconted tribes or
reading about the Comanches
um or watching an animal hunt, you know,
you watch a tiger hunt and in every
single hunt that the tiger goes on, they
are they're they're betting all the
chips. Like a large deer can kick and
split their skull or knock their front
teeth out with a hoof. And that might be
the last hunt that tiger ever goes on,
but sort of betting the house is part of
the game. And so that's part of where I
got to where where I was so many years
in and once once we got to a certain
point once we you know there was that
there was that that dip where I said
maybe I'm not this guy and you have to
choose who you are right it's like you
know the oracle told said to Neo she
goes you know you're not the one you go
okay you know and I I I did that to
myself I went well I'm not this isn't
going going to work but then once then
then a few years later if you talked
even if you talked to me two years ago I
would have
I don't care what happens. I'm just
going to keep riding boats through the
Amazon. It'll be fine. I didn't know
that it was going to go like this. And
that now we're all of a sudden now we
are the ones responsible for carrying on
Jane's message of hope of reminding
people that you can turn around a
seemingly terminal situation where the
entropy of global modernization is
destroying one of the largest ecosystems
on Earth. What could one person possibly
do? Well, we found a way.
>> There is something poetic in the idea
that you were pushed to your edge of
being able to survive
>> and at the moment when
>> you got right to the edge of your own
survival.
>> Yeah.
>> The torch of helping the Amazon to
survive was then passed to you.
>> When I was a kid, you learn these
stories. You hear the old stories where,
you know, the young man goes on an
expedition and along the way he meets a
a beggar and he helps the beggar cross
the bridge and then, you know, he's
going through this way and he meets some
bird that's stuck in a in a net and he
helps the bird and then, you know, then
later on when he finds the princess and
he's trying to fight the dragon and then
all of a sudden the beggar helps and
then the bird gets him out of the thing
and it's like, oh, these people come in
and they help. That was the archetypal
story that I got. And I think that
that's also the archetypal story that
then I ended up living where it's like,
you know, JJ said, "We should I'm local
and we should protect this forest. This
place we should protect." And I was
like, "That's amazing." And I and he and
he had the keys to the Amazon. We got to
go on adventures. And then it was like
Mosen showed up. He's like, "I got the
cameraman. I could show the world what
you do." And then we had this guy Stefan
showed up and other people showed up.
And all of a sudden, you know, you start
to amass this team of Avengers where you
go, "Wait, wait, hold on. These people
are really talented people that have and
we didn't realize, you know, JJ's the
jungle man. Mosen's a photographer.
Stefan came in. He was running teams at
Apple.
>> Jane Jane's the mentor.
>> Jane's Jane's the wizard. Jane's the
Gandalf.
>> Yeah.
>> Jane was the one saying, "This is what
you got to do. You got to get the ring
to Mount Doom." And uh and then suddenly
it happens. But but you can't you can't
tell people that they're going to you
know that that whole thing of in in the
movies where it's like you know there's
10 guys with guns and you go how are
they getting out of this one [laughter]
you know and it's like I've been in that
situation so many times and I think in
order to have the luck of getting bailed
out you either better be a mega black
belt and have some real good friends and
they better show up when it counts. And
so it's like you don't want to give
people advice to do that because because
then you're telling them to to take
risks they shouldn't be taking. But
coming from someone who took all the
risks, who bet my entire life on
becoming a jungle keeper and saving a
river and who bet my entire life on
going on these expeditions and jumping
on anacondas and running from elephants
when I was in Africa and India,
I happened to have made it.
In my job as a podcaster, I meet lots of
people who have climbed to the top of
their proverbial mountains, whether it's
in comedy or sports or business or
>> as a conservationist. And I think one of
the things they do all have in common.
>> Yeah.
>> Is at some point in their hero's
journey, they took a unusual set of
actions for an unusual period of time.
>> Yes. And so I think about that as a
principle maybe that can be transferable
is if you do want an unusual outcome
whatever that means
unusual behavior of some sort is the
precursor. And actually at moments in my
life where I hit fatigue or
>> things are more challenging. I always
remind myself of that these days. I
always say this is probably like why
most people don't get an unusual outcome
because this was is the logical moment
to like [__] pack throw it in pack
pack up the bags and go. And um when I
look at some of my great mentors in the
different fields that I'm in, that's
exactly what they did. They just
persisted for like an unusual amount of
time.
>> And I think persistence in your story is
such a throughine.
>> Yes. [snorts] I would say relentlessness
is
the most powerful element if you're
trying to achieve your dreams because
you're going to get knocked down again
and again and you find yourself in the
rain lost in the forest and you can't
even see the trail. I always say that,
you know, we didn't even know where we
wanted to go,
you know, and it's like we just kept
doing it. It's like the painter who just
goes, "I don't even know what I'm
painting, but I'm just going to keep
learning how these colors work, you
know, just just keep going." Because
it's an obsession and you can't really
you can't really
fake an obsession, right? If you if
you're going to spend 10,000 hours
throwing a basketball through a hoop,
you're doing that because you love it.
And there's work and there's discipline
and there's times where you're going to
feel that dip and that rise. But if
you're really doing it, if you're even
in the game, it's because you love it.
Mhm.
>> So if you can find something that you
love, then you can start building that
irrefutable proof of who you are because
you can go, okay, well, I've logged a
certain amount of time doing this thing
I love.
>> What is meaning to to you in your life?
What is that? Is it responsibility? Is
it something else?
>> Well, there's that thing of that you you
the more meaning you your your meaning
is directly correlated to how much
responsibility you take on. That that
we've all heard a hundred times. But to
me, it's it's I I've I've lived in a
world where things are reduced to such
um an incredibly basic level. It's like
I've lived in the mud with a machete and
if I want to eat, I get a fish. And so
like the truth of the rain and rocks has
become my sort of religion and the way
that I connect with God through the very
simple chemical physical elements of the
universe.
>> Do you believe in God?
>> Absolutely.
>> Absolutely. Absolutely.
>> Have you always believed in God?
>> Uh I think you know everybody goes
through that period in their teens and
20s where you sort of go I I can believe
in whatever I want or I could not
believe in whatever I want and then I
think as you as you mature I think a lot
of people come back. It's also society
it became very very uncool for a while
to say that. You almost couldn't say it.
You almost had to sneak your ass to
church, you know. Um
the if if the people that wake up and go
all this is very unimpressive to me. I'm
a walking miracle and I think there's no
God and I'm unimpressed. It's like you
you have a lot of delusions my friend.
Um we are floating on a rock through
space right now. Not a single person has
an explanation of what we're doing here.
All these incredible chemical processes
are happening in the rivers in our veins
and in the Amazon. When I dip my hands
into the river and I drink from the
river and you hold your arm up in the
sun and you watch the vapor come out of
your skin, the same moisture that you
just drank and it joins the clouds,
rains back on the jungle and becomes the
river again. And you are part of the
cycle.
You just tend to believe in God
because you feel like it's flowing. The
river and the sky are flowing through
you. And that's the nature version. I
mean, it can also just be hugging your
grandma.
>> I wondered if your deeper understanding
of science and evolution and all these
things might have made you more atheist
or agnostic.
>> No, I think science is the language of
God. I don't think that they're opposing
forces.
>> Do you do you believe in evolution and
natural selection?
>> It's not a matter of believing in
evolution. We have we have we have
animals in transitional forms. It's very
clear through the fossil record that
absolutely evolution is happening. I
just think that everyone I don't I'm not
sure where this black and white argument
even came from. I don't think it makes
sense to me then the wild is the church.
And so when I see trees cut down I I
feel it. I feel like people people are
[sighs]
if we have a role as humans and you said
what's meaning if we have a role as
humans on this planet it is to care for
each other and the other things. Seems
like that's the game right? There's
drugs and addiction and and and and
cheating and stealing and lying. There's
all these there's all these pitfalls
that you can fall into so easily. The
game is rigged so that all these things
feel really good, right? Real good while
you're doing them. But you can literally
lose the game permanently.
You know, you do a little bit of meth
because it felt good. All of a sudden,
you're a methhead and all of a sudden
you're dead. It's like you can very
quickly get, you know, couple of drinks
a day over the course of a couple of
decades and you miss a couple of
birthday parties and all of a sudden,
you know, it's like you can you can very
quickly in the wild it teaches you the
that fidiousness,
you know, if you don't check your boat
every day before it rains, after it
rains, make sure it didn't fill with
water. It's like the line between
survival and death is so small. And so I
think that the meaning I found is that
we are floating on a rock in space and
there's only so many animals and people
here and life is the antithesis to all
of the frigid blackness that is the
universe. And this is the only place
that we know for certain that life
exists, right? And we live at this
moment in history when we're losing
animals like elephants and polar bears
and tigers and the rainforests and the
ocean fisheries, the whales, and we
still have a chance to save them. And if
we save them, then our children have
clean air, fresh water, beautiful
places. The world continues to work as
it always has. And so the relationship
that we have to the people around us and
to the creatures around us and to the
environment around us is incredibly
meaningful. There was a little meme I
saw where it said, uh, if you're being
if you're overwhelmed by the events of
the world, go outside and look at the
birds. You are as meaningless as a
sparrow. And I went, man, as an
ecologist, each animal plays a crucial
role in the ecosystem. You know,
hummingbirds are transporting pollen and
the snakes are eating the rats and the
the the the predators are regulating all
of the prey animals and the trees are
providing shade and the animals are
engineering the the forest and the
forest is engineering the animals. You
are not the birds are not pointless.
Whoever wrote that was stupid
and the people reading it aren't
pointless either is the point.
Many humans think that we are a
dominant, more important species than
the snake that you just wrapped around
my neck or the sparrow in the trees.
Do you believe that's the case? Do you
believe that humans are more important
than
>> If you were to remove humans from planet
Earth, everything would get better in
like days, just like in CO, like the
national parks, the bears are frolicking
on the trails and everything. Um, if you
were to remove ants from planet Earth,
nature would collapse, right? So, if you
want to talk about ecological
importance, we're not that important.
That you'd have to think more
holistically. We're just one of many
different species.
>> But we were able to, you know, rule the
world because of our intellect.
>> But we are the apex or the human brain
is the most complex thing that we know
of. And so, in that way, we are the
stewards. We are the jungle keepers. we
are the ones that are supposed to be
caring for the rest of this. And so
again, whether or not we can I mean,
there's sort of this this people say
that, you know, there's times are worse
than they've ever been. And it's like I
go I'm down in the jungle, right? So I'm
down there. I miss out on a lot. I come
out I come up here and people are people
are I rate about some new news thing,
right? What someone said to someone or
what someone and I always come up and
I'm like, man, civilizations rise and
fall.
the health of our oceans, the existence
of our rainforests.
We're dealing with a with a a a one-way
door in history right now. You think
World War II was big, the ecological
collapse of our planet is pending, but
it's not too late. Jane was right.
There's still hope, but we're the last
generation that's going to have it. And
so, it's like, first of all, if you feel
meaningless, go put your boots on and
help.
You know, if Churchill the day before
D-Day was going, "Ah, it's probably not
going to work." What would have
happened? And it's like we are alive at
the most exciting time in history. Not
only is there a million things that need
to be done, there's people all over the
world that's doing it. So, one of the
things I've started telling to young
people, the advice that I can give is go
find someone that you admire. Go find a
master who's doing the work that you
want to emulate and put 5 years in
working for them. Don't go try to start
your own project right away. Don't go
try to start saving the world before you
know how it works. Go find the guy
that's tracking the snow leopards that's
up in the mountains.
Find him. Follow him. Learn from him. If
it's a business, go find the person
that's doing whatever it is you want to
do. Learn from them. I've seen pe
brilliant people with great business
ideas that don't have the people skills.
Go learn those people skills. Go work
with the people that have those people.
That easy common touch where they can
just shake your hand and all of a sudden
you feel like they're your best friend.
my whole thing. I mean, us starting an
organization that can protect the
jungle, me and JJ could could could
whack and machete and catch all the
anacas we want. Mosen was taking
pictures up and we had this team that
was like doing, you know, the motor
was going, but it wasn't starting. And
then I mentioned the guy Stefan who was
running teams at Apple. Now, this guy,
this man knows how to run a spreadsheet.
This man knows how to run teams of
people. He knows how to organize things.
So, he came in and wait, what are you
trying to do? you're trying to do this,
why don't you do it this way? You save a
bunch of money by doing it this way. And
he started running the teams. And so we
needed we realized we we we needed
things that we didn't even know existed.
And so again, the relentless, the
relentlessness, you you survived to
another day. But for people going out,
find those people because we learned
things from these people that we meet. I
mean, even from Dax, he came in and
provided the funding. But also, this is
a man that won capitalism. As a
billionaire, he's someone that knows how
to run a business. He said, "Okay, so
this is how you're going to run your
ranger program. Tell me how you're going
to do this." Just as a friend and
consultant, you end up learning so much
from him.
>> The very antithesis of what I saw when
you played the video of the unconted
tribe is some of the things going on in
at the moment in California and Texas
with humanoid robots and AI.
>> Yeah.
>> It's like the opposite.
>> Yes.
>> You know, Elon,
>> we live in opposite worlds. Yeah. I I
wondered if you had any thoughts about
this world we're heading into where
people might have microchips in their
brain and we'll have humanoid robots and
they're forecasting there'll be a
billion um of these humanoid robots in
the future. And AI is now so intelligent
that
>> they're saying within a year or two
there'll be AIs that are smarter than
every human that's ever lived. And even
one example of the humanoid robot
situation that blew my mind is when one
of the robots learns something, all of
the robots learn it.
>> And obviously you were just talking up
there about having to learn from
mentors. with humanoid robots and the
future that we seem to be huddling
towards.
>> Um, it seems like they might be the the
apex species. I wondered if you've
thought much about the technological
acceleration of the earth and
the risk of that and because it's the
opposite of everything you're talking
about in so many ways.
>> It is and it isn't. I mean, I like I
love living in modern times. I think
that like heart surgery and and your
iPad and the cameras. I think like I
love so much of modern technology
um flight. My god, how I love flight. We
can go anywhere. Would have taken them
eight months. Um this new obsession that
everybody has it it not a lot of things
get me biblical, but it makes me think
of the the you know, thou shalt not with
the false idols. Everyone is so obsessed
about AI. Shut up. Go outside. touch
some grass. Don't worry about the
robots. We don't live in Minority Report
yet. And it's like, if it's coming,
first of all, we are the engineers of
our reality, right? It's us. So, where
are these robots going to come from?
Unless we make them. And if they're so
smart, well, then get on your knees and
pray to them. You know, it's like do
whatever. But I I think that as as as
more and more people like
rebel against the AI slop they see in
their feeds, as more and more people
appreciate real human art and what it
takes a person to stare at a wall with a
with some paint and create something
that could move you to tears. I think
that we're going through a period of
delirious adolescence with a new
technology. Just like at Y2K, everyone
was like, "Everything's going to shut
down and nothing's going to work." And
it's like, "Okay, great. I'll be on a
hike. The world's going to continue to
work." And, you know, they've been
saying we're going to have flying cars
for how many years? We still don't have
them. Everyone's like, "We should go
colonize Mars." Like, great.
[__] Mars, though. Yeah. Let's fix this
planet. Prove that we're capable of
managing. It's like the kid going, "I
want to take over the company." And the
father going, "Get your room clean." I
think what you do might be hugely
benefited by everything that's going on
with technology and AI in part because
>> I think people are people's appreciation
for community, for nature, for things
that are irreplaceably human is only
going to increase. Yeah,
>> I have, you know, I have a couple of
like wild hypotheses and one of them is
that people are going to want to in a
world where we no longer need to gather
in cities for um collective labor, which
is basically why cities exist in large
part,
>> they will then want to be out in nature.
Yeah.
>> Because our Maslovian need of being out
in the trees and the oil we get and the
mental health benefits are going to
remain the same even if there is robots.
And actually, if I don't need to be in a
city, where would I rather be?
>> In the beautiful nature.
>> In the beautiful nature. I was saying to
my friends the other day, I think people
are going to start buying up farmland
and natural places because
>> you notice that when everyone sort of
makes it and gets rich enough that they
can do what they want, they go get a
house in the country.
>> Exactly.
>> Where they can raise their kids, breathe
some air, not just traffic exhaust. And
but what I'm what I'm not understanding
though is why everyone's so worried
about it. I mean, everyone's acting like
it's the beginning of Terminator 2,
except no one's catching on, right? and
and but and but but again if you listen
to what's the guy's name who runs
Nvidia?
>> Um Jensen Juan.
>> Yes. His I I listened to him on on Joe
Rogan. It was amazing cuz Rogan has the
ability like most like like which is why
he's so good at it. He asked the
questions we all want to ask. And he was
like when is AI going to take over? And
Jensen was like listen um AI is going to
optimize how effective humans can be at
their jobs. Right? Like he was like I
think he said with radiologists he goes
we thought we'd not need any more
radiologists. He's like it it made
radiologists better at their jobs.
>> And it's like I think that the hysteria
of like robots taking well that's good.
Let's use some robots to deliver
packages like great. But I don't think
that this this this this
anticipatory doom that everyone's
feeling on these fallen times of
everything's about to change again.
Really like literally actually guys go
touch the grass. Like it's I'm serious.
It's like it's not I come back from the
jungle where I'm fighting to save the
trees that make the air that these
people are breathing and I'm I'm a
little bit a little bit shocked by the
the amount of hysteria that I'm seeing
and like I'm down there getting hunted
by narot traffickers and and and and
running from the flames and these people
are like you won't believe what I saw on
the news today and I'm like I got it I'm
going back.
>> Do you consume this stuff? Are you on
social media?
>> No. Do you have apps and social media
apps on your phone?
>> It's funny. I got into a fight. Somebody
I'm sure that we'll get this reaction
for this conversation, but people kind
of get mad at me about this where I go,
I don't I don't want to that sort of
civilizations rise and fall thing. A lot
of people get very offended because
they're very invested in the news cycle
and and they're very hysterical and they
almost want to hold on to their
hysterics, right? And to me, it's very
important. I was just sitting at a table
with people and they said, you know, the
world's going to [__] It's never been
worse. First of all, live at the most
peaceful time in history. There's better
technology. We can save your life. We
can almost, you know, cure so many
different diseases. We've never We've
have this expanding compassion where our
species has learned to be more
compassionate that differences don't
make us less, right? And now we're even
expanding that to understand like, oh
wait, the other creatures on this planet
matter, too. We've never been more
dedicated to compassion. I mean, I was
just at a conservation conference and I
was meeting people who are making period
pads for girls in Africa who don't have
access to them. I know people who are
trying to save cheetahs. I I'm seeing
people doing amazing work all over the
news. And you know what the news is
reporting?
There was, you know, that there's an
assassination in the Philippines. We're
tribal. We're supposed to only know
what's going on in our village. Not doom
scrolling through a thousand tragedies a
day. That's of course it's going to send
your brain on fire. So, I've I have none
of that. I go on to Instagram. I've
curated it so that it's my feed. I see
conservationists rescuing elephants. I
see a couple of artists that I really
like. I have a couple like just all
really cool stuff. I never go to that
like that page that just shows you the
internet. I never do that. Just don't do
it. Just don't do it. It's bad for you.
It's really really bad for you. I watch
people doing it's scary.
>> When I did go to the Amazon, I went with
my now fiance
>> and she [clears throat]
wanted to do some plant medicine. Yes.
>> Um, as I said to you before we started
recording, I couldn't do it because
apparently I hadn't followed the diet
regime properly. Yeah.
>> But, um, I know that you did Iawaska.
And for anyone that doesn't know, IA is
a powerful psychoactive brew from the
Amazon used traditionally by indigenous
>> cultures.
How did your experience with Iaska
change you?
What happened? And how did it change
you?
>> Oh god. Again, I'm I don't know why I'm
I'm very cuz I'm I'm just I'm just in a
mood today. Um, there's no filter. I
don't I don't know. This is one of the
chapters I didn't know if I should put
in the book cuz I go take people through
the whole thing because the shaman that
we knew was the old shaman. It was JJ's
JJ's old father's best friend. And so he
he's old guy. He was been mixing Iawaska
in the forest for decades and learned
from the the ancient guys.
Now the first time I did it, it wasn't
such a big deal. I saw some geometric
patterns. I threw up. I had a
conversation with a tree. It was okay.
The problem is the old shaman at 80some
fell asleep while he was boiling the
Iwasa
and it became more intense in its
potency. And so when we drank the normal
dosage, we were receiving a mega dose.
And I went on a trip that I would never
ever ask to go on. I'm talking about the
creation of the universe, the big bang.
I mean, I went through worlds. Like for
a while I was shapeless in outer space
between solar systems. I mean it was
like [gasps]
it was horrifying.
And when we woke up the shaman was gone.
You know people drink Iwaska and they go
I'm going to go on a journey. I'm going
to focus on this. I want to I have my
intentions over here and I want to
this was this was just wormholes and
explosions and and and just just
craziness. And in the morning, we found
the shaman and he was laying in a stream
naked like the way they find ET at the
end of the movie. And uh we said, "What
the hell happened?" And he said, "I
overboiled the Iawaska." And he said,
"By the way, I retire." And he retired
as shaman for a whole week.
But but like that was my experience was
that it was so intense that I was just
happy to have physical form again. I
feel I felt like I died and came back.
It is very very powerful.
>> You said in the book I felt changed.
I felt changed in the sense that I had
never, you know, I'd come close to dying
a bunch of times. I'd come, but I mean
to to be removed and, you know, if you
go for surgery, they put you out and
it's black and then you come back. This
was I mean, who the hell even knew? It's
like it's like opening. It's like you've
lived in a gigantic mansion with 3,000
rooms your entire life, but you've only
ever lived in like one.
And then you take this stuff and all of
a sudden you go, "Whoa, there's so many
rooms and you have access to them and
the doors are all open and you're being
sucked through all of them at once." And
so it was like I mean at one point I was
I mean you the jungle vibrates through
you. I took the form of different
animals. I mean it was it was insanity.
I don't I wouldn't recommend it to
anybody.
>> What do the local people think it is as
a compound as a psychoactive? What do
they think is happening? Do they think
it's a religious experience?
>> Absolutely. It's most of them believe
that this is the gift of the gods to
humans and it is link between the spirit
world and our world. And they say that
the Amazon was formed when the anaconda
god slipped out of the mer the milky way
and carved the rivers, right? And if you
take the 40,000 species of trees in the
Amazon and did trial and error to try
and figure out which ones would interact
with each other, it doesn't really make
sense that ancient peoples came to this
by accident.
And so the shamans say that the gods
gave this to humans so that we could
interact with the other side.
What is jungle keepers? We've you've
used the word several times now and you
know it's word on the front of your new
book and I see it's written there on
your chest. But for anyone that doesn't
know what Jungle Keepers is, what the
mission of it is, how they might be able
to get involved and help, what is it?
>> Jungle Keepers is
the method we developed to find a way to
save the Amazon. And what we did was
this. We worked with the local people.
We spent years understanding what the
reality was on the ground. Jungle
Keepers is the system with which we
actually are saving the Amazon
rainforest. It's how we employ the
loggers and gold miners as conservation
rangers. But it's the way that we do
that. What we've done usually
conservation is done through grant
writing and government deals. We've done
this using modern technology using
social media for good. We've used I mean
it was through Instagram that we got our
first big funer. It was through
Instagram and podcasts that we've
reached a lot of our smaller funders.
And today,
Jungle Keepers is the most direct way
for people around the world to help the
indigenous people protect the Amazon.
And what that means is we have a donor
program. People go to junglekeepers.org
and whether it's for 5, 10, 100, some
people do $1,000 a month. They can
directly protect the land and provide
jobs for the local people. And it's
saving more animal heartbeats and
endangered species and those entire
uncontacted tribes all because people
all over the world care and they're
willing to part with the price of a
Starbucks coffee once a month.
>> So if people have been inspired by this
conversation Yes.
>> Um
>> they can go to junglekeepers.org and on
the website I'm on there now.
>> Yeah.
>> That you can give once um in a small
donation or you can give monthly.
anything from, as you said, the price of
a coffee up to bigger donations if
you're able to. And um there's some
superb information and resources and
videos on the website that explains more
about the work being done. I'm certainly
going to sign up to a monthly
subscription.
>> Thank you, John Keeper. [laughter]
>> No, it means a lot because it's the
shopping cart principle. It's like if
none of us do it, it won't work. If all
of us do it, it will work.
>> We'll make history.
>> Well, I'm going to sign up right now. Um
Amazing.
>> Definitely. and I'll I'll give my
monthly donation and I implore anyone
else that can has the means to to also
do it because it's such an you know it's
such a such an important beautiful part
of the world for all the reasons we've
discussed um in a way that I think is
often unappreciated and not um uh not
thought about enough because in part
these messages don't get out there and
most people don't realize that the
oxygen we breathe comes from this part
of the world and many of the medicines
we've discovered and the research that
we continue to do originates from this
part of the world. I mean, there's so
many I wanted to talk to you about this.
There's so many medicines and um sort of
medical research taking place in in this
ecosystem that is incredible.
Incredible. And I was I hearing I heard
you talk about how one day you got an
infection, antibiotics couldn't touch
>> and someone took you into the jungle,
gave you some sap from a tree bark and
it cured the infection.
>> Yeah. You see this where it looks like
somebody put a cigar out on my arm right
there? Little smooth bit. That was a
very rare disease. I was living in a mud
hut in India trying to track tigers.
There's only 3,000 tigers left. Um
although now it's gone up to five.
Tigers are coming back. So another
success story. But I was living in a mud
hut in India trying to track tigers and
I got this disease called tuleria.
And it's so rare that when I got it, I
brought it back to New York, went to the
infectious disease doctor. when he
figured out what it was and I'd been in
bed for like a month with this horrible
infection in my arm, this deep pocket of
pus and and I was on antibiotics and he
went, "This is so rare." He goes, "Do
you mind if I call in my students, my
fellows?" He goes, he goes, "Guys,
you're never going to see this again.
It's a disease that's tickornne through
rabbits and somehow gets into people and
manifests with an infection on the right
elbow." He goes, "This is one of the
rarest ones you're going to see." He
goes, "This is rare. They put me on
double antibiotics. cuz I had already
had a MRSA infection. They were like,
"Look, we got to really kill this
thing." And it was 2012 and my parents
said, "Whatever you do, do not go back
to the jungle with an infection cuz the
jungle's just going to make it worse."
And of course, I went to the jungle. We
had stuff to do. We our station was in
danger of dying, so I had to go back
with JJ and fix it up. And I showed up
and he looked at my go, "Why is your arm
taped up?" And I said, "Well, I have
this terrible infection." I said, "I've
been in bed for two months." I said, "I
have no energy. I'm on all these
antibiotics." And he looked at me, he
went, "This is okay." Hey. And he goes,
"No, no, come with me." We walked out.
He marches out into the jungle, hits
this hits the tree with the machete,
collects the white sap,
rubs it over this, and now this these
saps have like a latex quality, and when
you heat them, they they they they form
almost like a rubber. So, it formed a
rubber rubber cap over the infection.
Now, if you had pushed on it before, pus
would leak out. He just went like this
until it formed a seal. And then he put
a little bit into a concoction of leaf
juice that he made, made me drink that.
Either way, next day I woke up and the
infection was denatured. It was still a
wound, but it was no longer infected.
Killed the infection in one night. The
antibiotics hadn't been able to kill for
two months. [sighs]
And so stuff like that where he not only
knew what to do, he knew where to find
it. Recently when I was stung by a
stingray and I was in agonizing pain,
two of my friends collected bark, which
was JJ's nephew and brother. It's good
to be part of an indigenous family. Um,
they connect collected two different
kinds of bark. They boiled it into a pus
and they sucked the venom out of my out
of my foot with plant medicine.
It's incredible. And these are
technologies we don't have. And by the
way, yeah, we're losing physical
animals. We don't want to lose species,
but we're also losing indigenous
cultures. We're losing dialects and and
and and anthropologists like WDE Davis
will say that, you know, each language,
each each culture is a different
manifest. They said he was he has a
beautiful quote where he said other
cultures are not failed attempts at
being you. You know, it's it's each of
these is a different manifestation of
the human
different blossoms on the same vine. and
uh we're losing languages because what
happens is roads come in to these
communities they all learn to speak
Spanish let's say so they stop speaking
you know and the same thing in India
where you guys have seen this happening
where like the kids in the village might
speak a really local language and then
all of a sudden everybody wants to go to
the big city everybody has the internet
and Instagram and Tik Tok and wants to
make a little more money and they go and
these we're losing languages and these
each of these languages is a different
way of expressing ourselves
And so this there's just this very
interesting shift happening in the world
right now where there's a lot of
beautiful things that can still be
saved. And that's why it's like we're at
this amazing time where there's there's
still the old amazing things and we
still have all this amazing new
technology flooding in and more
knowledge at our fingertips than ever
before. And so the feeling of apathy I
don't get. I don't understand how
everybody isn't stoked.
>> I see you've got a a wedding ring on.
>> Oh, this. Yes. I um you know I know
you're recently married
>> like Yes. Two weeks ago.
>> Two weeks ago. One would ask how it's
possible for someone that spends so long
living in the jungle to hold down a
successful romantic relationship.
>> Yeah. Um, I think that the same thing
happened with this that happened with
the career where I said, I think right
around the time where I gave up, I said
it's never going to happen cuz what girl
I said, what girl could keep up with
repeated seven months in the jungle and
and um all the bot flies and infections
and anacondas and then forget now that
we're being hunted by the narot
traffickers and all this stuff. Not
nobody nobody fit into the life. And
then actually it was on a I was giving a
talk about the Amazon
uh in California actually over a year
ago and I met this girl and instantly we
had a connection and and and it was the
same thing. It was like we we we kind of
had both reached that same point where
we both gone yeah it's never going to
work because of our different
lifestyles. Um
and then and then it just and then it
just occurred. You just when you know,
you know. We got to know each other and
then the only way I could know if she
was really the one was to take her
catching. Uh we went crocodile catching
for cayman catching. First night that
she arrived, she came up the river on
the boat and we went out and we caught a
crocodile, held it together. I got to
show her the nictating membrane and the
the spikes coming out of it and it was
this beautiful smooth fronted cayman.
And then as we were floating down the
river up to our necks in the black water
with the Milky Way above us and we're
just sort of holding hands and I just
looked over and I was like, "Oh, I think
this is it." And then I proposed to her
in the treehouse. So on top of the top
of the jungle canopy with all the mist
and all the animals singing. Um but it
that I'm you know that makes me say I'm
so I'm so glad that I waited. You know,
it's like you have to wait until the
time where it makes sense on that thing,
you know. And I think you probably feel
the same where um probably took you a
while to find the right person.
>> Mhm.
And she comes on these expeditions with
you now. Or
>> she's way more than that, man. I mean,
look, there's like I said, there's a lot
of things I'm not good at. Um the
planes, trains, automobiles, the human
world, the Ubers, the fact you have to
push a button, the the the the
apparently, like I learned come on my
way to you, the the Tesla handles work
differently. um she knows all that and
so she's very good at keeping me
organized and when we go to the jungle
she's very good at being like hey don't
forget to thank those donors hey don't
forget you think this is normal it is
not normal teach people about those
those leaf cutter ants and it's like
she's really good at you know so she's
totally integrated loves being in the
jungle it it's just incredible it's the
it's the most it's the most wonderful
part of the journey so far
>> I'd love to actually um you just
mentioned leaf cutter ants and I did
watch your video on Instagram about the
leaf cutter ants and that I think that
was the moment I you before we started
recording that I I've really wanted to
go and do some sort of survival
>> um expedition in the jungle.
>> I could make this happen for you.
>> I think you I think you might be the
guy. [laughter]
>> But uh I did take a moment of pause when
I watched this video.
>> One of the worst episodes yet of why you
think you want my job, but definitely
don't really. Right now, my tent is
being dismantled by leaf cutter ants.
It's about 2:00 a.m. and I've been
trying to sleep and there's about 10
million leaf cutter ants outside of this
tent. And all they are doing is cutting
leafiz holes out of my tent. They are
carrying away the nylon into the night.
And because the leaf cutter ants are
working to dismantle every single thing
that I own, they're opening up holes big
enough for me to put my fist through,
which means everything else in the
Amazon is coming into my tent. And
because of that, I keep turning on the
lights. I just woke up because there's a
leaf cutter ant using its pinser jaws to
bite my ear to try and carry off a
piece. And inside this tent right now
are ants and termites and mosquitoes,
some sort of centipede, hoppers, moths,
and some insects that I can't even
identify. This is one of those times
where, you know, it's four more hours
until morning. If you get out of the
tent, you're going to get destroyed by
mosquitoes. It's raining outside. You're
going to get wet. This is what camping
in the wild is. Sometimes you put your
tent in the wrong place, and the leaf
cutter ants and the gods of the jungle
decide it's going to be the worst night
ever. All I can do is try and get some
sleep and I wake up every few seconds to
try and slap something off my face or
something flies up my nose. This is one
of those nightmare nights, man.
>> I didn't think of ants as being the
problem,
[clears throat] the thing that might
derail my journey to the jungle. But
there's a lot of scary things in the
jungle.
>> That quote you read about life being a
moment of stasis among the death amongst
the the churning death march of the
jungle. Everything you see in the jungle
is going to be eaten at some point.
Every jaguar, every butterfly, every
leaf. If the Amazon didn't have fungal
mcelium growing through everything, it
would bury itself in leaves and cease to
exist. It is a recycling machine. And
so, yes, every time a baby is born, they
try to survive. You look at that baby
snake. That baby snake might come out of
its egg. Now, that's a African ball
python, but you say like a baby boa
constrictor comes out of its mother,
starts crawling around the jungle, and
it might just get eaten by a bird. done.
And this is sort of back to what you're
saying about when should people give up
on their dreams. It's like look some
sometimes you get eaten by a bird right
out of the hatch. Like but in the jungle
the ants, the mosquitoes,
the fungus, the infections, it's all
trying to take you down. You are
calories. The leaves, which what which
you don't realize, the jungle is an
energy economy, right? Those trees are
stretching up to 160 ft because they're
trying to reach above the other trees to
get to the light because they want the
sunlight. That tropical sunlight is what
gives them the energy to grow those big
trunks. And then all the other epithetic
plants, the orchids and the lychans and
the and and the pitcher plants, those
are all growing on the branches. And
then down there in the shadows, there's
trees waiting that have no access to
light. Less than 3% of the sunlight in
the rainforest hits the ground. And
they're waiting beneath these titans
and they're waiting for a little bit of
sunlight. And once a day a little bit of
sunlight comes by and they grow that
much. They take them and then when one
big tree falls over and all of a sudden
you have this rush of sunlight capital,
all these trees shoot up and now those
trees shoot up and what's happening? The
leaf cutter ants are taking their little
bits of those leaves that have heavy
chemical compounds to stop the leaf
cutter ants from doing this. But they
take it and they bring it underground
and they farm it. They're one of the
only other species that farms. They farm
fungus off of the leaves that they eat.
But the entire thing is this vast
interconnected matrix of competition for
sunlight energy. You carry so much our
skin. We are these gods of energy. We're
we're a large animal walking through the
forest. So the mosquitoes and the
leeches and and the jaguar and the like
all those things are like man if you
died you realize how many animals you'd
make happy. like the jungle. The jungle
is saying, "Come here. Come to me. I'll
I'll recycle you."
>> Are you scared of anything?
>> I'm scared that people won't wake up
quick enough to save the systems that
keep us alive. But I also am an optimist
and I believe that we're at this point
where people feel very lost and things
look really dire and then it pulls back,
you You know, and I I'm a big believer
in I mean, tigers went from a 100,000
tigers in 1900 down to just like 3,000
tigers now. We're we're coming back up.
We're up around five or 6,000 tigers.
Humpback whales before before whaling,
you think you like 130,000 humpback
whales. They went down as low as a
thousand humpback whales. We almost lost
humpback whales. Then they banned whales
whaling and now humpback whales are back
to almost pre-whaling numbers. Same
thing goes for bald eagles. There's been
so many conservation success. We had a
hole in the ozone layer. Everybody
forgets this. We had a hole in the in
the only thing that protects us from
being incinerated by the sun. And we
found a way to fix it.
So, I'm an optimist. I'm not I'm not
scared. And this is my this is my best
confutation to the darkness. This is my
best way of saying look that that title
when they told me to I didn't come up
with the subtitle, the what it takes,
what does it say? What it takes to
change the world. I didn't come up with
that, but I thought it was too hefty. I
didn't want it. I felt uncomfortable.
Um,
but I do think that that the idea that
that we can change the fate of things is
an important thing to remember in these
times.
>> Jungle Keeper, what it takes to change
the world. This book is about the
profound power of saying yes. Yes to
one's calling. Yes to sticking with your
dream when it comes at a high cost. And
yes to taking a stand to save what might
otherwise be gone in a generation. It's
a story of vocation, connectedness, and
hope.
What a brilliant, beautiful, rare book.
I'm going to link it below for anyone
that wants to continue this conversation
and wants to learn more and go deeper.
Um, you're a brilliant storyteller.
>> Thank you.
>> It's one of your great skills. I don't
know where you learned it cuz I I don't
think they do classes for storytelling
in in the Amazon, but it's certainly one
of your great skills and it's a very
important skill to wield when you've got
a message you need the world to hear.
>> It's a very important story. I think I
learned it from Tolken and from Arthur
Conand Doyle and from Jane Goodall. I
mean, those were the people my parents
read to me growing up. We have a closing
tradition, Paul, where the last guest
leaves a question for the next, not
knowing who they're leaving it for. And
the question left for you is, if you
only had
three years left to live,
>> what would you regret not doing? And are
you working on that now? If no, why not?
>> If I had three years left to live,
I would very much regret
not finishing the mission that I
started. And so
whether we like it or not, we're going
to we're either going to win and save it
or we're going to lose. 3 years
would be like just barely able to see
it. I would regret so much coming so far
and then not coming to fruition because
you mentioned before the idea of a wave
and it's like so much has happened and
we have come to this place where so much
is possible but we're still in the
barrel and we're not done yet. So if I
had three years left to go, I know that
all those heartbeats are depending on me
and I would that's that would be my
answer.
>> Paul, thank you. It's um incredible work
you're doing and I'm so glad that
there's people in the world like you
that are doing this and um if
[clears throat] anyone has been inspired
by your conversation, I really do highly
recommend you go and make a donation or
pledge support in some way over on the
Jungle Keeper website because um not all
of us have the means or the ability to
go out and do what you're doing on the
front line of this issue. But um as you
say, [clears throat] it makes a huge
amount of difference even people
donating small amounts of money because
it compounds into something much more
bigger and and those small gestures can
save all the heartbeats that you're
describing.
>> Thank God for it. Thank you.
>> Thank you. We're done. Thank you. Thank
you.
>> Very soon you will be in the ice bath
with me.
>> But I don't like the cold.
>> That's cool.
>> Oh gosh.
>> Stay with your breath.
>> Whoff has defied logic time and time
again. He's able to withstand extreme
cold
>> and even ran to the top of Everest in
his underwear.